Cam Analyzer v4.3 for Windows 
Check Appendices 3 - 9 for most recent changes 


User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
31531 W Eight Mile Rd Livonia, MI 48152 248-473-9230 Fax 248-442-7750 Website: www.performancetrends.com Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Performance Trends, Inc.  31531 W Eight Mile Rd, Livonia, MI 48152 Tech Assistance for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230 Fax: 248-442-7750  Email:  feedback@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice 
Copyright (C) 2018 PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC.    All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp.  1982-2018 All Rights Reserved 
International Business Machines Corp. makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, regarding the enclosed computer package, its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.   
IBM PC, XT, and AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. Cam Dr is a trademark of Quadrant Scientific. Cam Pro Plus is a trademark of Audie Technology. Competition Cams is a trademark of Competition Cams Inc. UltraDyne is a trademark of Ultra Dyne Corporation 
DISCLAIMER Of WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION Of FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE Of SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY Of OBLIGATION Of PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES. PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS Of PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE Of THE POSSIBILITY Of SUCH DAMAGES. 
Continued on next page. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS Of ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
******************************************* W A R N I N G  ****************************************** 
The Cam Analyzer makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with engines and Tests.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-Obtaining data to input to the program
 -Interpreting the program's results Before making measurements of or modifications to any Test, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO:
 -Regard the safety consequences 
-Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 
-Read the entire user's manual 
-Obey all federal, state & local laws 
-Respect the rights and safety of others 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Overview of Features 1 
1.2 Before You Start 2 
1.3 A Word of Caution 3 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 4 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 5 
Chapter 2 Definitions 9 
2.0 Basic Program Operation 9 2.1 Main Screen (cam data input) 13 2.2 Preferences 19 2.3 Test Setup and Cam Specs 21 2.4 Find TDC 27 2.5 Generate Degree Wheel Readings 33 2.6 New Test Screen 35 2.7 EZ Data Entry 37 
Chapter 3 Output 39 
3.1 Reports 41 3.2 ASCII Data Files (Pro version only) 49 3.3 Graphs 51 3.4 Printer Output 63 3.5 Data Libraries 67 3.6 Opening Other Cam File Formats 71 3.7 History Log 75 3.8 Create Cam Dr File 77 
Table of Contents, cont 
Chapter 4 Examples 79 
Example 4.1 Running A Cam Test By Entering Cam 81 Lift Measurements Directly Into The Computer, With TDC Procedure 
Example 4.2 Comparing and Analyzing Cams 93 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 99 
Appendix 2: Backing Up Data 107 
Appendix 3: New Features for Version 3.2 111 Appendix 4: New Features for Version 3.2B 117    (Cam Test Stand Electronics) Appendix 5: New Features for Version 3.8 137 Appendix 6: New Features for Version 4.0 159 Appendix 7: FFT Analysis in v4.0 181 Appendix 8: Filter Test Files (Plus Version Only) 183 Appendix 9: New Features for Version 4.3 185 Index 213 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 


Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features 
The Cam Analyzer program by Performance Trends Inc. is a computer program to help engine builders check their camshafts for accuracy and proper installation. The program offers options to record, save, graph, organize, open (retrieve), report and analyze cam lift data recorded from dial indicator and degree wheel data.  In addition, cam profile data can be written to a Cam Dr (tm) file for use in our Engine Analyzer’ Pro' program for detailed engine performance and valve train dynamics simulation. The Cam Analyzer v2.0 is a unique program which will save cam time and improve the analysis of cam profile cam data.  
New features in v2.0 include: 
• 
User friendly, Windows interface, compatible with Windows 3.1, 95, 98, 2000 and NT (and later for XP, Vista, Windows 7, 8 and 10). 

• 
Can print results using most any Windows compatible printer, many times in color. 

• 
Reads cam files from several other cam programs, like Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, Doctor Dr, etc.  This one program can let you compare cam data from several sources. 

• 
Generate cam profiles from simple inputs like duration at .050” lift, centerline and maximum tappet lift. 

• 
Save nearly unlimited number of cams for recall, comparison and analysis in the future. 

• 
Find TDC following a step-by-step procedure.  This procedure’s results can be printed separately as a data sheet, very handy for engine builders. 

• 
Allows several reporting and graphing options for analysis. 

• 
Ability to write ASCII files for importing data into other computer programs. 

• 
"History Log", keeps a running log of cams you have recently started new, run, graphed or reported. 


Please read Sections 1.2 "Before You Start" and 1.3 "A Word of Caution" before you turn on the computer.  Then try running the program following the guidelines in 1.4 "Getting Started" and 1.5 "Example to Get You Going".  When you feel a little familiar with the program, take time to read this entire manual.  It will show you all the things you can do with this powerful tool. 
We are constantly enhancing and advancing this cam measurement and analysis program.  We now have our electronic Cam Test Stand (for fast and precise “on stand” or “in engine” cam measurements) and are up to Version 4.3. Appendices 3 - 9 cover all the features we’ve added and have GREATLY enhanced on this program since this manual was originally written.  Please be sure to read them also. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
Most any computer running Windows 98, ME, XP, 2000, NT, Vista, Windows 7. 

• 
Approximately 20 Megabyte of disk space.  (More is required for storing large #s of tests.) 


Many terms used by the Cam Analyzer and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, i.e. Duration, Lobe Lift, Lobe Area, etc.  However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Cam Analyzer. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Cam Analyzer directory or folder.   
To read this file, use Windows Explorer to find the Cam Analyzer directory, usually CA20 under PERFTRNS.PTI.  Then double click on README.DOC. Wordpad will display the contents.  This file can also be displayed right in the Cam Analyzer by clicking on Help at the Main Screen, then clicking on Display Readme.doc File. 
Version 3.8 and later installs to the C:\Program Files\Performance Trends\Cam Analyzer v3.8  (sometimes C:\Program Files(x86)\Performance Trends\Cam Analyzer v3.8) folder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

1.3 A Word of Caution 
This program or  manual may make reference to how a particular type of cam may perform in an engine. These references can be used to judge cam specs, cam profile modifications, etc. However, an engine is a very complex system, which makes exact suggestions or recommendations about all details impossible.  Therefore, the user must recognize: 
The software cannot predict the safety of an engine modification or running condition.  Please read and follow any safety precautions as described in this manual.  Also, get "expert" opinions before running your engine at an RPM or torque level higher than what it was originally designed for. 
The software cannot make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software are estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions will limit the accuracy. 

• 
Environmental and engine conditions, fuel, the driving situation, etc. are never constant and repeatable.   

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help understand cam profile measurements; what parameters are important and what are the tradeoffs. 

• 
Provide general direction for making modifications.  This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, engine and cam books, etc.  Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all input data. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Also, programs are written by people so it's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your call may help us correct it.) 


Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Cam Analyzer from the distribution CD to a hard drive before it will run.  To do this, simply install the CD in your CD Rom drive and the Performance Trends Installation Wizard should automatically start, allowing you to install the Cam Analyzer and demos of any of our other products. 
If the CD does not auto-run, then click on Start, then Run, then Browse and find your CD drive.  Then look for SETUP.EXE on the CD and run it to run the Installation Wizard.  If you want to bypass the Wizard, go into the Programs folder on the CD and run the Cam Analyzer v4.0 Installer.exe file. 
Figure 1.1 Installation Wizard or Bypassing Installation Wizard 

The first time you run the Cam Analyzer, you will be asked to enter your name as the Registered Owner.  During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied.  Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a Registered Code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card.  Click on Help, then About Cam Analyzer at the Main Screen to review your name and code # . 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Cam Analyzer, click on Start, then Programs, then Performance Trends, and then Cam Analyzer.  Or just click on the Desktop Icon for Cam Analyzer.  During startup of the program, you will be given some introductory tips.   
One of these “Tips” will ask if the “last cam you were running should be loaded”.  If you have just received the program, this cam will be an example cam which was loaded at the factory.  If you have run the Cam Analyzer before, this will be the last cam 
you were working with.  If you are just learning the program, it is recommended you answer yes to this question so you have some example data to work with to understand how the program works.  
After these brief introduction screens and questions, you will be left at the Main Screen shown below: 

Figure 1.2 Main Screen 
Name of 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
From this Main Screen, you can:                                            
• 
Choose to review your options by clicking on the menu items at the top of the screen. 

• 
Open or save a file of cam results and specs by clicking on File in the upper left corner, and then the Open or Save commands. 

• 
Add, edit or review cam data or cam comments for the file you are currently working with.   

• 
Graph or Report the cam for the file you are currently working with.   

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for your needs. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
At the top of the Main Screen, you will see the blue title bar.  There you will notice the name of the current cam is contained in square brackets [ ] (if you did load in a Cam Test at program startup or opened a file by clicking on File, then Open). The program has several examples of cams saved in the Test Libraries’ Example folder right from the factory. 
To get started, let's try a couple of Menu commands.  Click on the Graph menu command to open up the graph options menu shown in Figure 1.3.  That Graph Type shown in Figure 1.3 is for intake data.  If you want to include the exhaust lobe also, click on the down arrow to select “Int & Exh Cam Data”, or some other graph Type. 
Click on the Make Graph button to 
Figure 1.4 Graph from Options Selected in Figure 1.3 

produce the graph shown in Figure 
1.4. At the graph screen you have several other options available for changing the graph.  These options are available by clicking on the commands in the menu bar or on the buttons at the top of the screen, including the Help command.  The Help command at this screen (and most screens) provides a good background on what the various options are.  For now, just click on Back at the upper left to return to the Main Screen. 
A Test File is made up of the cam data (cam lift and degree wheel data) and other data like Degree Wheel Type, Cam #, Operator, 

Click on Help for an overview of your options for this 
Click on Back to return to the Main Screen 
Comments, etc. This is explained in Section 3.5 "Data Libraries".  Click on the Test Setup and Cam Specs command to obtain a menu as shown in Figure 1.5. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

in this manual for more info.  (For some screens, you will have to click on the Help button for definitions of specs.) 
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various performance calculations, read Section 3.5 of this manual called Data Libraries to learn how to save a set of cam data or component specifications or recall information which has been previously saved.  Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction (C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Whenever you start the Cam Analyzer, you are brought to a Main Screen which will look like either Figure 2.1 or 2.3.  If you have not yet selected a cam to work with and have not started a new cam, the Main Screen is mostly blank, like Figure 2.1. 
If you want to Open a previously saved cam, you can click on File in the upper left corner, then click on Open (from all saved cams).  You will get a screen as shown in Figure 
2.2 where you are presented with a list of saved cams in the Test Library. Some cams are examples provided by Performance Trends.  As you run cams yourself and save the results, you will add many more cams to the library. These saved files are useful for making comparisons in the future, and can be used as cam patterns (or templates) for new cams (saving you considerable time by not having to type in specs which match a past cam).  
Figure 2.2 shows that the Test Library is divided into sections (called Folders in Figure 2.2)  to help organize a large number of cams.  For example, all cams for the company ABC Engines could be saved under a section name of ABC­ENG. All 4 cylinder Ford cams could be saved under a section name of 4CYL­FORD. This will save considerable time and confusion when trying to located a particular cam in the future.  To look in different sections, click on the Folder name from the list shown at the lower right of Figure 2.2.  The list of cams will then be updated for that Folder.  To pick a cam, simply click on it from the list of cams, then click on the Open button. (For those familiar with computers, Folders are actually subdirectories or folders in the CAMDATA folder.  The Name “Folder” can be changed to something else, like “Customer” in the Preferences menu.) 
Figure 2.1 Main Screen Before Opening a Test File 

Click on File, then Open (from all saved tests) to open a 
previously saved test file. You can also open an Example Test file provided with the program. You will obtain a screen as shown in Figure 2.2. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.3 Main Screen After Opening a Test File Name of Current Test File Menu Commands of File, Graph, etc. These 

Click on thesegive you all the options to operate the program tabs to switch and change test data. 
between intake and exhaust lobes on this particular cam. 
Enter most any test comments here to keep notes about this cam or test. 
Move the mouse over an area on the screen, and a Help description of that item is given here 
This summary graph shows cam lift from each lobe. The graph for the lobe you are currently displaying is graphed in color, blue if intake, red if exhaust 
Click on the graph for that data to be 
displayed in the Test Data grid. 
Click on Slide Bars to display more Test Data, which 
may not be able to fit on the screen. 
Click on a lift in the Test Data grid to enter cam lift. 
You can NOT type in Degree Wheel readings directly.  They CAN be changed by clicking on Generate Degree Wheel Button or Clicking in the ‘Point’ column. 
Click either in the first column (Point column) or top row (with titles of the columns) to open up an Edit  menu to change or delete data, etc. 
A summary of critical test settings is given here. Click on a setting to change it (in the case of Cam 
Number), or to bring up the menu where it can be changed. 
If you are working with a particular cam, the data will be presented as shown in Figure 2.3.  Notice in Figure 2.3 that a current cam name is listed at the top in square brackets [ ].  This is the file of cam specs, cam lift data and degree wheel specs which are currently saved in the Cam Library, and are the data and specs you are currently working with.  If you change the cam data or specs, make a graph or Report, it is for this cam file.   
If you click on one of the Menu Commands at the top of the Main Screen, you can be presented with a screen of specs, as shown in Figure 2.4.  Figure 2.4 discusses some of the commands to enter or change settings at this menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.4, Explanation of Sections of Typical Menu  (Test Setup and Cam Specs Menu) 
Names of specs. Click on them for a description in the Help frame in the lower right corner. 
Standard text entry box where you can type in a number for a spec. 
Drop down combo box. For some specs (like Cam Advance) you can either type something in the box, or click on the arrow button to select a pre-programmed selection. For most others you can only select from a list of pre-programmed choices. 

A definition of the spec you are currently highlighting (working with) is given here with a page # in this manual for more information. 

Standard menu commands which provide the options for closing this menu (Back), 

printing this screen (click on Print), etc. See the sections later in this chapter for more details on individual menus. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 



2.1 Main Screen (Test Data) Inputs 
With introduction of Cam Test Stand, these settings have greatly expanded.  Check Appendices 4-9. 
The Main Screen is shown in Figure 2.5 and is designed to resemble a typical paper data sheet.  Like a paper data sheet, you enter cam lifts for various Degree Wheel readings as needed.  The Main Screen is made up of 5 basic sections as shown in Figure 2.5.  These are discussed in the next 5 sections.  The rest of this section gives an overview of how a Cam Test is organized. 
Figure 2.5 Main Screen After Opening a Test File 
1) Click on these 

2.1.1 Tabs 
A cam test is made up of 2 Test Data grids, 1 intake and 1 exhaust, each with a tab as shown in Figure 2.5. You move to different lobes by clicking on the Tabs at the top of the screen.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.1.2 Test Setup and Cam Specs 
Test Time and Date 
This records the time and date at the start of the cam.  When a cam is started with the New Test command (click on File, then click on New Test at the Main Screen), the computer's  current time and date are saved as the test time and date.  The test time and date can also be changed by clicking on it here at the Main Screen. 
Rckr Ratio/Lash 
Describes the rocker arm ratio and valve lash for the lobe being displayed.  Click on this item to display the Test Setup and Cam Specs menu where this data is contained. 
Cam Number 
Cam Numbers can be critical for shops installing many cams a year.  The program keeps track of #s so you don't assign duplicates or skip #s.  Consistency of Cam # pattern also makes it easy to find cams in the Test Library.  If you click on the Cam # spec, the menu of Figure 2.6 is displayed.  This menu lets you pick a new cam # 3 different ways. 
1. 
You can start a new Cam # format if you select Yes for Enter a New Number Format.  For example, say you currently are using 'Johnson0012' as a Cam # for 1 customer Johnson.  Now you have a new customer Smith and you want to start with #s like 'Smith0000'.  

2. 
You can simple use the last Cam # used, incremented up by 1 you select No for Enter a New Number Format. 

3. 
Select No for Enter a New Number Format, then select some other Cam # (not the last Cam #) from the Numbers list, and a new Cam # will be created from it.  This new # will be, either the exact # you picked (typical if you are flowing a cam which you have already flowed), or incremented up by 1 if you request it (typical if you are working with a new cam but with the same Cam # format).  This is a list of the last 100 Cam #s you have assigned. 


If you want to type in most anything you want for a Cam Number, or leave it blank, go to the Preferences menu and set Allow 

Direct Entry of Cam Numbers to No. 
For Advanced Users:  To delete or change #s in this list, use Wordpad or Notepad and edit the 'headnum.pti' file in the CA20 folder, but keep a backup in case you make a mistake. 
Test Operator 
This is the name of the operator who ran the cam.  Click on this item for the menu of Figure 2.7 to be displayed, where you can type in a new operator name, or choose from one you have previously entered.  It is always recommended you first check the list of existing operators, so you do not end up with several names for the same operator.  For example, Bob, Bobby and Robert may all be for the same guy. 
To pick an existing operator name, pick No for Enter a New Operator, then pick from the Operator list.  To enter a New Operator name,  pick Yes for Enter a New Operator, then type in a New Operator name, which will be added to the list of operator names. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Test Comments 
Test comments are for making most any notes about the cam, unusual observations, customer requirements, etc.  These comments are saved with the cam file and can be printed with the reports and graphs. 
Help 
The help frame will describe whatever portion of the screen the mouse has passed over or clicked on. 
2.1.3 Summary Graph 
The summary graph shows cam lift graphed versus Degree Wheel reading for both the lobes on this particular cam (Figure 2.5). 
A useful feature of the Summary Graph is that if you click on a part of the graph for the current lobe (a blue or red graph), that particular data point will be displayed and highlighted in the Test Data grid.  This is a useful feature for finding points which look “out of line” with the rest of the data. 
2.1.4 Test Data Grid 
Point 
The point column simply numbers the rows of data, and is used by the program to identify a row of data for messages.  Another feature is if you click on a Point #,  an Edit Test Data menu shown in Figure 2.8 pops up, letting you edit the row you clicked on.  Other editing menus are available by clicking on the top row,  for editing columns. 
NOTE: Check Appendix 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9 for new Edit features. 
Degree Wheel 
This is the reading on the particular degree wheel type you have requested in Test Setup and 
Figure 2.8 Edit Menus 

This menu presented if you click on a Point #. The insert button is only available if you click on Point 1, the top row. 

Click on top of Degree Wheel Readings column for this Edit Menu. 


Click on top of Cam Lift column for this Edit Menu. 
Cam Specs menu.  There are several ways to enter Degree Wheel readings. 
• 
When you first start a New Test, the Degree Wheel column will be blank.  Before you can start entering cam lift data, the program will display the Generate Degree Wheel Readings menu.  There you can specify the starting Degree Wheel point and the range of Degree Wheel readings you estimate you will need.  Click on OK at this menu, and Degree Wheel readings will be generated for the range you specified. 

• 
After Degree Wheel readings have been generated, you can still click on Generate Degree Wheel Readings to “re-generate” readings.  This could be for extending the range or to correct some type of error you made a previous time you generated Degree Wheel Readings. 

• 
If you enter cam lift data for the last row at the bottom of the Test Data grid, an additional Degree Wheel reading is generated automatically in anticipation you may want to enter another cam lift point. 

• 
You can click on a row in the Point column and the program will present an Edit Options menu shown in Figure 2.8.  There you can add or delete rows, or advance or retard the degree wheel readings. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
The steps between consecutive Degree Wheel Readings is set in the Test Setup and Cam Specs menu, usually 2, 4, 5 or 10 degrees. The smaller the increment, the more precise the cam measurement but the more time required to enter the data. All Degree Wheel readings for a particular test are at the same increment.  You can not insert a Degree Wheel reading at a 2 degree increment when the other increments are at 4 degrees. 
Tappet Lift 
Is the cam lift (sometimes called follower, lifter or lobe lift) recorded from the dial indicator as you turn the cam and crank to each Degree Wheel reading.  As lifts are entered, they are automatically graphed in the Summary Graph to help you spot problems immediately. 
2.1.5 Main Screen Commands 
The next section discusses some of the commands available at the top of the Main Screen.  Most will not be discussed here in detail, as they are discussed in other sections of this manual. 
File (see Figure 2.9 for File Options) 
New (start new test) 
Click on File, then New to start a new test.  This process will “walk you through” some critical steps to start with a blank Test Data grid, or to keep certain data from the previous cam.  Keeping data can save you considerable time since you don’t have to type in information which may be the same as the current cam.  The New Test command is discussed in full detail in Section 2.6, page 35. 
Open (from all saved tests) 
This option presents the Open Test File menu discussed in Section 3.5 page 67, Data Libraries.  From there you have several options to open a previously saved cam file from any place in the Test Library, or from most any place on the computer, including the floppy disk drive. 
Open (from History Log) 
This option presents the History Log, a chronological list of cam files you have been working with as discussed in Section 3.7, page 75.  From there you can review a summary of the last 25 to 100 cams, and pick one to open.  This method can make it easier to find a file you have just worked with lately, say in the last couple of weeks. 
Save 
Select Save if you want to save the current cam and any recent changes to the same name as you are currently working with. This is the file name shown in square bracket [ ] at the top of the Main Screen. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Save As 
Select Save As if you want to save the current cam and any recent changes to a new name or new folder. You will be presented with the menu discussed in Section 3.5 page 67 where you can change the cam name, change the folder you are saving it to, or add a new folder name. 
Open from Floppy Drive 
This command provides a simple 1 click command to open a standard Windows “File Open” menu displaying the contents of the disk in the Floppy Drive.  This provides a convenient method for copying files from one computer to another. 
Save to Floppy Drive 
This command provides a simple 1 click command to save the current cam file to the disk in the Floppy Drive to the same name as is currently being used.  This provides a convenient method for copying files from one computer to another. 
Create Cam Dr File 
The Cam Dr (tm) is a popular computerized cam measurement tool.  It stores its data on disk so it can be retrieved later for analysis by the Cam Dr's software, or used in other software.  Performance Trends' Engine Analyzer’ Pro' can read a Cam Dr file to precisely simulate valve train dynamics and engine performance with your exact cam profile.  Therefore, if you want to create a cam profile file of the current Cam File shown on the Main Screen, you would use this command. 
See Section 3.8 for more details. 
Print Main Screen Print Blank Worksheet Windows Printer Setup 
The Print Main Screen and Print Blank Worksheet commands simply give you instructions how to do each.  These commands were placed under File as many users will look under File to find these print options.  The Windows Printer Setup lets you change your Windows default printer, paper orientation, etc for printing Reports or graphs in other areas of the program. 
Graph 
The Graph command lets you graph several different types of data from the current cam, either by itself or with data from other cams for comparisons.  The Graph options are discussed in detail is Section 3.3,  page 51. 
Report 
The Report command lets you create Reports of several different types of data from the current cam, either by itself or with data from other cams (Pro version only)  for comparisons.  The Report options are discussed in detail is Section 3.1,  page 41. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Test Setup and Cam Specs 
The Test Setup and Cam Specs command opens up the Test Setup and Cam Specs menu.  There you tell the program what type of cam data you are working with, what type of degree wheel you are using, etc. Test Setup and Cam Specs are discussed in detail in Section 2.3, page 21. 
Preferences 
Preferences let you customize the program for your needs and for your computer and printer.  See Section 2.2, page 19. 
Help 
Click on Help for several options to help describe your options at the Main Screen, and for other information to help you understand how this program works. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

2.2 Preferences 
Note: Preferences have been greatly enhanced in v3.2 through 4.0.  Check Index and Appendices 3-9 for these new features. 
Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Screen to bring up the Preferences menu shown in Figure 
2.10. Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. Preferences may also save time by eliminating steps you don't require. 
Program Title Comments 

Enter most any text here for the First and Second lines.  These 2 lines will appear at the top of printouts and printed graphs. This is a good place for your business name or your personal name.  You can change these entries as often as you wish. 
Alternate Lifts for Reports 
Use Standard Lifts for Reports 
Special reports which display cam lobe area, durations, and opening and closing events at specific cam lifts. Select Yes for this spec and the program will use its default low lifts, plus the additional defaults of every .050” lift from .050”  up to .500” cam lift.  Select No, and the 6 cam lift input boxes become enabled, where you can enter most any cam lift between 0 and 1 inch.  Now data will be reported at these lifts you have specified. 
Note that these are cam lifts. If you want to specify a particular valve lift, you must divide by rocker arm ratio.  For example, to specify .030” valve lift (like .030 valve lash), you would specify .020”  (.030 / 1.5 = .020). 
Default Floppy Disk Drive 
Choose the letter of the floppy disk drive on your computer, usually A .  This is the disk drive which will be first opened when using the Save to Floppy Disk or Open from Floppy Disk File commands at the Main Screen. 
Printer Fonts 
Choose which basic type of font to use for printouts.  You may not get your choice if your printer does not support that particular font. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Allow Not Smoothing Cam File 
Choose Yes for this specs and an additional option shows up in the Create Cam Dr File menu, which allows the user to pick if they want the cam data smoothed or not before the Cam Dr File is written.  Since we strongly recommend that the data is always smoothed, this preference is set to No when you first get the Cam Analyzer.  
# Tests Kept in History Log 
Pick the number of cams which you want the History Log to hold,  from 25 to 100. 
Printed Graph Width, % of Page 
Due to the endless combinations of computers, Windows setups and printers, some printed graphs may not fill the page, some may extend off the page.  This option lets you expand (% greater than 100) or shrink (% less than 100) the printed graph to better fit the page. 
Main Screen Graph Lines 
This option lets you choose the line thickness of the summary graph of cam lift vs crank degrees on the Main Screen. 
Graph Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment 
Choose Yes if you are getting breaks in the border around printed graphs (usually happens with dot matrix printers). 
Test Folder Name in Program 
The Cam Analyzer saves cams under different folders (directories) under the main folder CAMDATA.  Some users may prefer to have the 'Folder' be called 'EngFamily' or 'Customer', depending how they choose to organize their cams.  Your entry here of most any text up to 9 characters is what the program will use to call the different folders where cam files are stored. 
Allow Direct Entry of Cam Numbers 
Choose yes, and you can type in most anything you want for a Cam Number, or leave it blank.  Choose No and the program directs you to a Cam Number menu where you can check previous numbers which have been used.  This menu also directs you to create numbers which are in a format of letters followed by numbers, like ULDYN000455. This could stand for the 455th UltraDyne (tm) cam you have purchased. If you are in a big shop, with several people creating cam files, No may be the better choices to keep consistency in numbers. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

2.3 Test Setup and Cam Specs 
With introduction of Cam Test Stand, these settings have greatly expanded.  Check Appendices 4-9. 
The Test Setup and Cam Specs determine what type of cam file you are working with and what data is recorded, lets you enter specs for producing valve lift curves, and specifies the type of degree wheel  you are using. 
Type of Cam Data 
Click on the down arrow button to select how the cam lift data was generated.  Choices are basically: 
• 
Entered by hand 

• 
Generate from cam specs 

• 
Computer Cam File 


Entered by hand is the type you will use if you are going to measure a cam using a degree wheel and dial indicator.  If you choose this type, several specs in this menu are then not shown as they are not needed by the program. 
Generate from Cam Specs is a method where the program will create an entire profile based on simple specs you will enter in this menu, like duration, centerline, etc.   This choice will display all Test Setup specs because they can all be used to generate the cam profile. The American aftermarket standard is .050" lift.  Metric and motorcycles use .040" (1 mm).  Seat timing is also called 'advertised' duration and is not as accurate a method.  The Deg Steps spec becomes disabled (dimmed to gray and you can not change it) because the program always uses 2 deg steps for generating profiles.  Note:  The Cam Analyzer is NOT a cam design program, and the profiles generated are only approximations of a particular cam profile. 
Computer Cam File is used if you have opened up a cam file which was created by some other type of computer program or cam measurement system.  Typical cam file formats that the Cam Analyzer can read include: 
• 
From Cam Dr File 

• 
From Cam Pro File 

• 
From Comp Cam's File - Intake 

• 
From Comp Cam's File - Exhaust 

• 
From Dr Doctor File - Intake 

• 
From Dr Doctor File - Exhaust 

• 
From S96 File - Intake 

• 
From S96 File - Exhaust 

• 
From Andrews File - Intake 

• 
From Andrews File - Exhaust 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Usually these Computer Cam File types are entered by the program itself when you open one of these types of cam files from the Cam Library.  See Section 3.6, Opening Other Cam File Formats. 
Deg Steps 
Click on the down arrow button to select how many degrees between each cam lift measurement.  The smaller this number the more readings required (if you are entering data by hand) or the more readings generated (if you are generating from the simple cam specs).  
Lifter (profile) Type 
This combo box lets you pick the type of lifter and the “steepness” or “aggressiveness” of the cam’s profiles.  The combinations 
consist of:  
Hyd vs Solid  Hydraulic vs Solid lash adjustment  
Flat vs Roller  Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile (Roller being more aggressive)  
Mild vs Agr  Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile (Agr being more aggressive)  

The choice of Hydraulic vs Solid is the most important as this dictates the use of a lash setting.  The other choices simply determine differences in the steepness of the profile for the same Max Lobe Lift.. Most truly aggressive cams or roller cams have more Max Lobe Lift for a given duration, and milder or hydraulic cams have less Max Lobe Lift. 
For Cyl # 
Click on the down arrow button to select the Cylinder # for this particular cam lobe.  This is mainly used when you are measuring a cam lobe or reading a cam file.  
Important: The specs below may update (change) as you change other specs.  For example, if       you change a centerline, the Total Cam Advance number changes to reflect the new centerline. 
Rocker Arm Ratio 
Identifies the ratio between tappet lift and valve lift.  Generally rocker arm ratios vary between 1.3 to 2.0.  For valve trains with no rocker arms, for example overhead cam systems with directing acting tappets, enter 1.  See Figure 2.13. The Pro assumes the ratio is constant although actual rocker arm ratios vary slightly with valve lift. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Actual Lash @ Valve, in 
Identifies the lash or clearance in inches between the valve tip and its actuator, generally the rocker arm.  If you have specified a hydraulic Lifter (profile) Type, this spec is disabled. 
Notes:  This spec works with the Designed Valve Lash spec.  If you specify an Actual Valve Lash nearly the same as the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened as the cam profile was designed.  If you specify a smaller Actual Valve Lash than the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened longer and higher than what the cam was designed for. And vice versa, if you specify a larger Actual Valve Lash than the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened less time and less lift than what the cam was designed for. 
Centerline, deg ATDC 
Is the location of the maximum lift point on the cam profile.  If you are letting the program generate a standard cam profile, this is also exactly half way between the open and closing point because the program only generates the same opening and closing profile (a symetric lobe).  This is not necessarily the case if you are working with a Cam File or Measuring a Cam by hand , which may have very different opening and closing profiles. 
Duration @ xxx 
Is the number of crank degrees where the tappet is lifted to the cam lift specified as the Lift for Rating Events above base circle. 
Opening @ xxx 
Identifies crankshaft degrees before top dead center where the tappet has been lifted to the Rated Tappet Lift above Base Circle on the opening ramp. (Rated Tappet Lift  is specified previously.) This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs. If this event occurs after top dead center, enter a negative value.  For example, if it is reported as 4 degrees after top dead center, enter -4. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Closing @ xxx 
Identifies crankshaft degrees before top dead center where the tappet has been lowered to the Rated Tappet Lift above Base Circle on the closing ramp. (Rated Tappet Lift  is specified previously.) This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs.  It is highly unlikely, but if this event occurs before bottom dead center, enter a negative value.  For example, if it is reported as 4 degrees before bottom dead center, enter -4. 
Max Lobe Lift, in 
Identifies how high the cam lobe lifts the tappet above Base Circle in inches.  If you are given "gross valve lift" by the cam grinder, divide by the rocker arm ratio assumed by the cam grinder to obtain gross or maximum tappet lift.  Note that the rocker arm ratio assumed by the cam grinder may not be the rocker arm ratio you are actually using. 
Gross Intake Valve Lift, in 
Is the maximum lift of the valve with NO valve lash (even if it is a mechanical cam with valve lash).  Mathematically it is Max Lobe Lift  multiplied by rocker arm ratio.  This is the standard way most cam grinders rate their cams for valve lift, sometimes called Advertised Lift. This number is calculated from other specs in this menu and can not be entered directly. 
Note: If you are not using (specifying in the program) the same Rocker Arm Ratios as what the cam grinder is assuming, this number will not match the cam grinder’s catalog or advertised lift. 
Designed Valve Lash, in 
Is the valve lash the cam grinder recommends you use, or what the cam was ground for.  See Actual Lash @ Valve above. 
Total Cam Advance 
This combo box lets you either pick an advance, retard or “straight up” cam timing by clicking on the arrow key, or you can type in an advance or retard in degrees directly.  If you just enter a number, a number with a + sign (ex. +4) or a number followed by the letters “adv”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam advance.  If you just enter a number with a - sign (ex. -4) or a number followed by the letters “ret”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam retard. 
Total cam advance is based on the current Intake and Exhaust Centerlines.  If the centerlines are equal, Total Advance is set to 0 or straight up by the program. This  method of using Total Cam Advance should match cam specs used by most cam grinders. 
To change cam timing from how it was ground by the cam grinder you will need a special set of timing gears or an offset timing pin, key or bushing. In general, advancing the cam will give more lower end torque while giving up some top end HP; and retarding will give up low end torque to gain top end HP. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Lobe Separation, cam deg 
Is the separation between the intake and exhaust centerlines in cam (not crankshaft) degrees, and is the standard method used by most cam grinders.  This number is calculated from other specs in this menu and can not be entered directly. 
Keep Orig File's Lobe Separation 
This spec is only visible if you are working with a Cam Dr or Cam Pro Plus file, cam files which have both intake and exhaust lobes.  Select 'Yes' to keep the Lobe Separation which was originally measured with the cam.  This separation is displayed in the Lobe Separation box and the Exhaust Lobe Centerline spec is disabled.  Select 'No' to enable Exhaust Centerline so you can specify any Lobe Separation.  
Degree Wheel 
Type 
Click on the down arrow button to select the type of degree wheel you will use for measuring the cam.  A simple sketch will be made of the wheel below.  

Note:  If you are testing a cam out of the engine, like in a Vee block, you will have to make up a special degree wheel or modify the marks of an existing degree wheel.  You would double the reading on a normal wheel to obtain the new reading on a wheel mounted on the cam.  For example, for a 0 - 90 - 180 - 270 - 360/0 wheel, the readings would now 0 - 180 - 360/0 - 180 - 360/0. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 



2.4 Find TDC 

indexed to your crankshaft before recording cam lift numbers if cam timing numbers are important. To do this, you must find TDC accurately.  For example, if you are only interested in duration at .050”, maximum lobe lift, acceleration and velocity graphs, etc., cam timing and indexing the degree wheel is not important.  If you want to know centerlines, cam advance, opening and closing events at .050”, then cam timing is important.  If you don’t understand the difference, then you should always find TDC so you can index your degree wheel correctly. 
This screen is meant to be used as a step-by-step procedure. You should do step 3 before you do step 4, etc. Therefore, start at the top, Step 1, and work your way down the screen. 
1) Select Method to Determine TDC 
Step 1:  Click on the down arrow button to select the method of determining TDC.  The first method uses a dial indicator to measure piston position close to TDC.  The 2nd method uses some mechanical stop to limit piston travel to approximately .050" from TDC.  See Figures 2.16 and 2.17. Your choice here will change many of the other inputs and steps on this screen. 
Method 1 uses a dial indicator to measure out 2 points on either side of TDC.  A disadvantage of Method 1 is that the heads must be removed (or you need a special dial indicator which can access the piston dome through the spark plug hole.) 
Method 2 uses a mechanical stop in the cylinder or head.  A stop can be a stiff bar bolted to the engine deck as shown in Figure 2.17. Or it can be a spark plug body with the porcelain removed and a bolt welded in its place  This type can be used with the head installed, but can bend (introducing errors), damage a piston with a complicated dome, or not work at all depending on spark plug installation angle. The stop will contact the piston at the same distance from TDC with the crank on either side of TDC.  Two disadvantages of Method 2 include: 
• 
Possible damage to the piston if too much force is used to seat the piston against the stop. 

• 
Depending on the design of stop, you may have to remove and adjust or file the stop if the degree wheel readings do not fall into the range allowed by the Cam Analyzer.  


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Steps for Method 1 
2) Set Approximate TDC and Zero 
Step 2:  Position #1's piston to the highest point in the bore (approximately TDC).  Install your degree wheel on the crank and pointer to read approximately TDC.  Install your dial indicator and set it to read approximately .000".  Choose 'Done' when done. 
3) Enter Reading at .050", ATDC 
Step 3: Rotate the crank CLOCKWISE until the dial indicator reads exactly .050".  Enter the degree wheel reading at this point. 
4) Enter Reading at .050", BTDC 
Step 4: Rotate the crank COUNTER-CLOCKWISE until the dial indicator again reads exactly .050" on the other side of TDC.  Enter the degree wheel reading at this point. 
5) Rotate Crank to Read 
Step 5: WITHOUT LOOSENING the degree wheel or adjusting the pointer, rotate the crank CLOCKWISE until the pointer reads the number as calculated by the program.  This is shown in  Figure 2.15 on previous page.  Cyl #1's piston is now exactly at TDC.  Choose 'Done' when done. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

6)
 Adjust Pointer/Wheel to Read TDC 


Step 6: WITHOUT MOVING CRANK OR PISTON, adjust the pointer (or loosen and rotate the degree wheel) until the pointer and wheel read exactly TDC.  Choose 'Done' when done. 
Operator 
If you want, type in an Operator Name or click on the down arrow key to select from the list of operator names which have already been used. 
Comment 
If you want, enter most any comment of up to 40 characters to be stored with this file and printed with this screen if you choose to print this screen. 

Steps for Method 2 
2) Set Approx TDC, CCW, Install Stop 
Step 2:  Position #1's piston to the highest point in the bore (approximately TDC).  Install your degree wheel on the crank and pointer to read approximately TDC.  Rotate Crank COUNTER-Clockwise about 10-40 degrees.  Install the 'Stop' and adjust it so it touches the piston top in this range of degree readings.  Choose 'Done' when done. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

3)
 Enter CCW Reading at Stop, ATDC 


Step 3:  Continue rotating the crank COUNTER-Clockwise almost a full revolution until the piston touches the stop.  Enter the degree wheel reading at this point. 
4) Enter Reading at Stop, BTDC 
Step 4:  Rotate the crank CLOCKWISE almost a full revolution until the piston again touches the stop.  Enter the degree wheel reading at this point. 
5) Rotate Crank to Read 
Step 5: WITHOUT LOOSENING the degree wheel or adjusting the pointer, REMOVE THE STOP.  Then rotate the crank CLOCKWISE until the pointer reads the number as calculated by the program.  This is shown in  Figure 2.15 on previous page.  Cyl #1's piston is now exactly at TDC.  Choose 'Done' when done. 
6) Adjust Pointer/Wheel to Read TDC 
Step 6: WITHOUT MOVING CRANK OR PISTON, adjust the pointer (or loosen and rotate the degree wheel) until the pointer and wheel read exactly TDC.  Choose 'Done' when done. 
Background 
As the piston approaches TDC, there is a relationship between the 
Figure 2.18 Relationship Between Piston’s Distance from TDC and
crankshaft angle from TDC in degrees 
Crank Angle from TDC
and the distance the piston is from TDC in inches.  The same relationship essentially is true as the piston leaves TDC.  See Figure 2.18.  
Piston Distance 
If we could accurately measure 
Down from 
exactly when the piston was .000 
TDC in inches 
inches from TDC, we would know where TDC was on the crank. However, we can not reliably measure piston movement that accurately.  As Figure 2.19 shows, a small error in piston distance from TDC in the region close to TDC creates a large error in TDC determination.

 TDC 
Instead, we select a piston position a fair distance away from TDC, for 
                                                             Crank Angle from TDC 
example .050".  Here an error in piston position only produces a small error in crank angle.  By finding this same piston position on both sides of TDC, and splitting the difference, TDC can be found 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
very accurately. See Figure 2.20. Note that the distance from TDC picked is not important, just that the same distance is used on both sides of TDC. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 



2.5 Generate Degree Wheel Readings 
When you start to enter Cam Lift data after starting a New Test, or when you click on the Generate Degree Wheel Readings button, the program presents the menu shown in Figure 2.21.  At this screen, you basically enter the first Degree Wheel Reading, the Crank Degree Step size, and expected total duration for the lobe.  A preview is given and a graphical representation of the span of degree wheel readings is drawn on a typical degree wheel. 
First Degree Wheel Reading 
Enter the first degree wheel reading on the opening ramp, usually this is for the first point about .001'' above base circle.  
Before/After TDC 
Click on the down arrow key to select the degree wheel's notation of either Before or After Top Dead Center (TDC) or Bottom Dead Center (BDC).   Check the Degree Wheel drawing to see if the pointer is drawn at the correct position. 
Crank Deg Steps 
Click on the down arrow button 

to select how many crank degrees between each cam lift measurement.  The smaller this number the more readings required (if you are entering data by hand) or the more readings generated (if you are generating from the simple cam specs). 
Estimated Duration 
Click on the down arrow button to select the number of degrees you estimate you will measure on this cam lobe.  You can always add more if you need to. 
Deg. Wheel Type 
Click on the down arrow button to select the type of degree wheel you will use for measuring the cam.  A simple sketch will be made of the wheel to the right.  The Deg. Wheel Type defaults to the type picked in the Test Setup menu.  Should you change it in this screen, it is also changed in the Test Setup menu. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 



2.6 New Test Menu: 

The New Test command is available by clicking on File at the top, left of the Main Screen, then selecting New Test.  You will then be presented with the screen shown in Figure 2.22.  Getting a new cam started right is very important for making the test accurate and easy. (Also see Example 4.1 for more details on the New Test menu.) 
Figure 2.22 New Test Menu
When starting a New Test, it is often best to first Open a previous cam which is similar to the New Test you will be running (similar cam specs, similar degree wheel, etc.)  This previous cam will then be the 'pattern' or 'template' for the New Test and will save you from having to type in specs to describe this New Test.  This also ensures consistency between your cams and reduces the possibility of errors. 
If the current cam is not a good 'pattern' for this new cam (or if there currently is no cam displayed), you can abort starting this new test by clicking on 'Cancel (don't start new test)' at the top of the New Test screen. Then click on 'File' at the top, left of the Main Screen and select one of the 'Open' options to open a past test to serve as a pattern. 
If you do start with a blank cam 
want to keep these specs for the new test.  Once the new test is started
(which may be the case when 
you can then make modifications to these specs if you want.
you first get this program), or want to modify some specs from the previous cam by clicking on the 'See Specs' buttons for Test Setup.  Click on Help at this menu for more info on how to enter these specs. 
When you close out the Test Setup menu, you are brought back to the New Test screen. Most Test Setup specs can be changed once the test has started with no problems. 
Four critical specs are listed separately at the top: 
1. 
File Name for New Test is the file name the program will create for saving the Cam Data for the new cam you are starting. The program fills in a default name of the current cam name, but increments the last digit in the name by 1.  You can change this name to most anything you like.  The program will warn you if the name entered is not valid and show you what is wrong. See Section 3.5 for a descriptions of valid file names. 

2. 
Operator for New Test is the name of the operator for this cam.  Click on Pick to pick an operator name already used or to enter a new name.  The program defaults to the operator of the current cam test. 

3. 
Cam # for New Test is critical for shops who use a cam numbering system.  Click on Assign to create a new Cam # based on the last Cam # assigned (incremented up by 1) or to start with a new type of Cam #.  (If you want to type in most 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
anything you want for a Cam Number, or leave it blank, go to the Preferences menu and set Allow Direct Entry of Cam Numbers to No.) 
4. Folder Name for New Test is the folder in the CAMDATA folder where the cam will be saved.  The program may not be using the name 'folder' for this spec, but whatever word you have assigned in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen.  The folder name 'Examples' is reserved for Performance Trends example cams supplied with the program, and can NOT be used for your cams. 
When you are ready to start the new test, click on 'Start New Test' at the top of the screen.  If some critical specs have not been entered, the program will warn you and ask you for them at that time.  The program will fill in the Test Time and Date based on the computer's time and date.  This can be changed later by clicking on the Test Time/Date at the Main Screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

2.7 EZ Data Entry 
This screen shows you EZ Data Entry screen which can save you considerable time and keep you from making mistakes when entering cam lift data. (Also see Example 4.1 for more details.) 

The principle behind this screen is that if you can estimate a cam lift based on the previous 2 cam lift numbers.  For example, if the previous cam lifts were .002 and .003, a reasonable estimate of the next cam lift would be .004.  If you were setting at a blank row where the previous 2 rows had .002 and .003 as the cam lifts, you could click on the Estimate Next Lift button and the program would fill in .004.  Now, if the dial indicator is actually showing .005, you can “Nudge” .004 up to .005 by clicking on the Nudge Up button twice (each click is .0005 inches). 
Many times it is easier to press keyboard keys than repositioning the mouse and clicking on a particular button.  The EZ Data Entry screen allows you to do this.  See Figure 2.24.  You can use the 4 arrow keys on the lower right side of the keyboard, plus the 0 (or insert) key from the number keypad also on the left side of the keyboard.  These 5 keys let you do everything you need to do that the mouse can do in this screen.  On laptops without a number keypad, the 0 key or Insert key will work as the 0 key on the number keypad. 
The general EZ Data Entry procedure would consist of: 
1. 
Pressing the Insert Key to estimate the lift for the current row based on the 2 previous rows 

2. 
Pressing the left or right arrow keys to get the estimated lift to match the actual lift (Nudge up or down as necessary). 

3. 
Pressing the down arrow key to advance to the next row. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
4. Repeating steps 1 - 3. 
Until you get used to this process, this may not seem any faster than typing in numbers.  However, with a little practice you can save considerable time and avoid mistakes. 
Notes: 
If you have typed a cam lift umber into the Lift box, the keys may not work until you click on a button with the mouse or choose a Data Point with the mouse. 
  Figure 2.24  Using Keys for EZ Data Entry 
Nudge lift Move up 1 row 
up .0005” 
Nudge lift down .0005” 
Move down 1 row Estimate Next Lift 



There must be accurate cam lifts already entered into the 2 rows before the current row for the program to accurately estimate the next cam lift.  Therefore, this process works best if you start at the 3rd row of a lobe (after typing in the first 2 lifts) and work steadily through the entire lobe. 
Menu Commands Close 
Closes this screen and returns you to the Main Screen. 
Help 
Brings up “on screen” help. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



Chapter 3 Output 
The Cam Analyzer provides several ways to view and output the cam results, including: 
• 
Reports of tabular data displayed on the screen 

• 
ASCII files for importing results to other software packages 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output of Reports or graphs 

• 
History Log 

• 
Data Libraries for recording cam data for later use. 


All these topics will be covered in this chapter. Figure 3.1 shows how to reach all these various features. 
Figure 3.1 Various Output Options from the Test Results Screen  
Click on File to display several options to Save test files, Open test files which were previously saved, display the History Log, or print information. 
Click on Graph to display several Graph Options and produce a high resolution graph. 
Click on Report to display several Report Options and produce a tabular report.  Once a report is displayed, it can be output as an ASCII file, or printed. Open from History Log
Name of current Test File displays a chronological log of test files you have recently worked with (started new, opened, made graphs or reports of, etc.) Section 3.7. 

Saving options to Save a test file are discussed in Section 3.5. 
Opening options to open a previously saved test file are discussed in Section 3.5. 
Although Print options are limited on the Main Screen, most menus have a Print button to print that menu, or a File command which lists Print options under it. See Section 34 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


3.1 Reports 
Click on the Report menu command at the Main Screen to be presented with the Report Options Menu shown in Figure 3.2.  The inputs in this menu are described below. 
     Also check Appendicies 5-9 for new report features. 
Type 
Several types of Reports can be picked by clicking on the down arrow key of this combo box.  Depending on your choice, several options in this menu may be enabled or disabled.  These types are discussed in upcoming sections.  
Report Lift Report Velocity Report Acceleration Report Jerk 
Pick Yes for any of these 4 data types to be included in the report. 

Lift is the Cam Lift data either kept as cam lift or converted to Valve Lift based on the specified lash and Rocker Arm Ratio in the Test Setup specs. 
Velocity is the rate of change of lift, or the derivative of lift (in mathematical terms).  The units are Inches per cam degree, or thousandths of inch per cam degree if you have set the Scaling spec in the Reports Menu to “Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000”.  For example, if the report shows Velocity is 1.377 and Scaling is set to “Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000”, the actual velocity is .001377 inches per degree. 
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity, or the derivative of velocity (in mathematical terms).  The units are Inches per cam degree per cam degree (inches/deg2), or thousandths of inch per cam degree per cam degree if you have set the Scaling spec in the Reports Menu to “Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000”.  For example, if the report shows Acceleration is .1377 and Scaling is set to “Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000”, the actual acceleration is .0001377 inches per degree. 
Jerk is the rate of change of acceleration, or the derivative of acceleration (in mathematical terms).  The units are Inches per cam degree per cam degree per cam degree (inches/deg3), or thousandths of inch per cam degree per cam degree per cam degree if you have set the Scaling spec in the Reports Menu to “Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000”.  For example, if the report shows Jerk is .01377 and Scaling is set to “Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000”, the actual jerk is .00001377 inches per degree. 
For some Report Types, like a Duration Report, these specs are not needed and are disabled (dimmed to gray and you can not change them). 
Table 3.1 Units of Measure for Cam and Valve Data 

Data Type  Units of Measure (for Scaling set to “Don’t Mult Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000”)  *  
Lift  inches  
Velocity  inches/cam degree  
Acceleration  inches/cam degree/cam degree (inches/cam degree2)  
Jerk  inches/cam degree/cam degree/cam degree (inches/cam degree3)  

* If you set “Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000” to Yes, then inches are turned in thousandths of an inch. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Scaling 
Select “Mult Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000” and the Velocity, Acceleration and Jerk values are multiplied by 1000, so they are more similar to the lift numbers.  Select “Don’t Mult Vel/Accel/Jerk” and they are reported in actual inches/deg, inches/deg2, or inches/deg3. 
Report Data Every 
Click on the down arrow key of this combo box. to pick how often to report data.  The smaller the number, the more detailed and longer the report. 
Degrees 
Click on the down arrow key of this combo box. to pick how the degrees should be labeled for the report. 
1. 
Mark TDC and BDC where only top and bottom dead center are marked.  All other degrees are labeled in universal degrees 

(0 - 720). 

2. 
Mark like Degree Wheel where degrees are marked like the degree wheel you see on the Main Screen. This can be very confusing should you choose to export this data as an ASCII file. 

3. 
Mark all as numbers (ie 60-720)  where all 


Figure 3.3 Illustration of Various Amounts of Filtering on Cam Lift No Filtering Lift Filtering = None            Lift Filtering = Some 
(as done when Lift  (as done when Lift  (as done for either type  
Filtering = None and  Filtering = None and  of data measured by  
program is analyzing  program is analyzing cam  computer or by hand.)  
computer measured file  lift data recorded by hand.)  
   like Cam Dr.)        


Lift Filtering 
Cam analysis almost always requires various amounts of filtering or smoothing of measured data.  That is because minor measurement errors exist in the cam lift or crank degree measurements, even those done with very precise instruments.  The effect of these small measurement errors are greatly magnified when velocity, acceleration, and jerk calculations are made. 
Figure 3.3 gives some idea of how the lift curve and data would look with various amounts of filtering.  Note that Figure 3.3 is somewhat exaggerated so the idea of filtering can be seen. 
Choose None, and the cam lift data entered by hand is only smoothed one time.  Cam lift data from computerized cam measurement systems (like a Cam Dr file) is not smoothed.  (Precise computerized measurements may not require additional smoothing.)  Choosing None for computerized cam files may be necessary to more accurately see what the computerized cam measurement systems actually measured, or to find defects measured in the actual cam lobe. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
By choosing Some, the program will perform additional filtering (smoothing) of the cam lift profile.  This additional filtering will be barely noticeable in the lift graphs or reports.  However it does have a significant impact on calculated velocity, acceleration and jerk. Figure 
3.4 shows how additional filtering also smoothes out the acceleration curves. For this reason, additional filtering is always recommended when a Cam Dr (tm) file is created.   
The advantages of additional filtering include: 
• 
Filtering can reduce the effect of minor measurement errors. 

• 
The resulting cam lift profile (and velocity and acceleration) should be more like what the cam grinder intended to grind.   

• 
You can preview the cam profile created when you make a Cam Dr file. 


The disadvantages to additional filtering include: 
• 
Additional calculation time is required for reports and graphs. 

• 
Possibility of "smoothing over" some real defect in a cam profile. See Figure 3.5. 


Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering 
This combo box lets you add additional filtering (smoothing) to only the velocity, acceleration and jerk data.  Usually, these data types require at least Some filtering, with Moderate and Heavy required sometimes with Acceleration and usually with Jerk.  Figure 3.4 shows the effect of additional filtering on Velocity and Acceleration. 

Figure 3.5 Cam Lift Curves from Cam Dr File (measured by computer instruments) Lift Filtering = None Lift Filtering = Some 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
As a “rule of thumb”, you want to use the minimum filtering available that still produces relatively smooth data graphs.  Do NOT over-filter by specifying more filtering than you need.   
Figure 3.18 (page 55 in the Graph section) shows some roughness in Acceleration when Filtering = None, however Velocity looks good. Setting Filtering = Moderate definitely smoothed out the Acceleration graph, but perhaps too much.  Velocity is probably over-filtered. Figure 3.18 shows that the Velocity data is probably most accurate with Filtering = None, and the Acceleration data would probably be best with Filtering = Some. 
Table 3.2 Recommended Filtering 

Type of Data Graphed  Recommended Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering  
Velocity  None, sometimes Some  
Acceleration  Some, sometimes Moderate  
Jerk  Moderate to Heavy  

Report Types 
Int & Exh Cam Data Int Cam Data Exh Cam Data Int & Exh Valve Data Int Valve Data Exh Valve Data 
These reports let you pick the type of data (lift, velocity, acceleration and/or jerk) to be included in the report.  See Figure 3.2, page 41.  The data can be for the intake lobe, exhaust lobe or both; and for either valve data or cam data. Cam results will be very similar to the Cam Lift data you measured, and similar to most computerized cam checking results. Valve data will use the Rocker Arm Ratio and lash specs (no lash if the Type of profile is specified as hydraulic) settings in the Test Setup and Cam Specs menu.  Valve lift is calculated from cam lift as follows:  
        Valve Lift = ( Cam Lift x Rocker Arm Ratio ) - Valve Lash 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Int & Exh Raw Data 
This Report simply restates the raw data recorded on the Test  Data grid for each lobe. If you select this Report all specs in the Reports menu are disabled.  Generally, raw data is only useful for finding errors in data which occurred during the cam measurement test.  For example, during analysis of data, one data point looks "out of line" from the others.  By examining the raw data, you may discover that a lift was entered as .233 when it should have been .223.   
Int & Exh Duration Int Duration Exh Duration 
These Report types display the duration of the lobe at various lift points.  The lifts the program uses for determining lifts are at every .050” of cam lift starting at .050” up to .500”.  In addition, there are 6 lifts which the user can specify in the Preferences menu, discussed in Section 2.2 on page 19.  Usually these are lower lifts like .006, .020, etc.  These are lifts which may be used for valve lash, and which may be used by a particular cam grinder to advertised durations. 
Note that these are cam lifts. If you want to check a particular valve lift, you must divide by rocker arm ratio.  For example, to check .030” valve lift (like .030 valve lash), you would check .020”  (.030 / 1.5 = .020). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.7 Portion of Int & Exh Duration Report 

Int & Exh Lobe Area 
Figure 3.8, Definition of Lobe Area Int Lobe Area Exh Lobe Area 
This Report contains Lobe Area measurements is addition to a simple duration measurement. Lobe area is defined in Figure 3.8, and is the “Area Under the Cam Lift Curve”.  For example, a roller with more aggressive opening and closing ramps will have more Lobe Area than a gentler flat tappet cam, even though they have the same duration at .050” and max lift. 
Int & Exh LArea+Dur Report Int LArea+Dur Report Exh LArea+Dur Report 
These types of report basically combine the outputs from the Duration and Lobe Area reports.  See Figure 3.10. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Figure 3.10 Int & Exh LArea+Dur Report 

Note that the exhaust data comes at the end of this report, not on the right side of the report as in other reports. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



3.2 ASCII Data Files 
You may want to use the results from the Cam Analyzer in other software packages.  This could be for additional graph capabilities, statistical analysis, data basing, etc.  Once you have created a Report (as shown in Section 3.1), click on File to write the results to an ASCII file with a name of your choosing.  The ASCII File command is possible any time a Report is displayed on the screen. 
You can only save the results currently displayed on the Report screen.  If you want to write an ASCII file of a cam file you have previously run,  you must open that cam file at the Main Screen first, then create a Report for that cam file. 
Note:  ASCII files can be of several different formats and most will not be readable by programs expecting computer files from Cam Drs or Cam Pro Plus measurement systems.  These file formats are very specific and must be created by the measurement system software.  Cam Dr files can be created by the Cam Analyzer and are discussed in Section 3.8. 
ASCII File Options 
Comma Separated 
Select this option to insert commas between data points.  Leave this unchecked for data to be arranged in evenly spaced columns. 
Include Text 
De-select (uncheck) this option to strip out all titles and letters, leaving only numbers. 
Convert to Columns 
If you do not select this option, data will be written to the file much like it is displayed in the Report on the screen.  Select this option to have the Report turned on its side, that is, the rows will become columns and the columns will become rows. 
File Name 
Enter a file name for saving this ASCII file. Checks are made to ensure what you enter is a valid file name and that you are not overwriting an existing file.  The file is written to the Cam Analyzer folder (directory), the folder which contains the CA.EXE program file. 
There are certain limitations for file names, including: 
• 
Names can only be 11 characters long. 

• 
Names can not contain certain characters, like commas (,), plus signs (+), or spaces ( ).  The program will warn you if you use an illegal character. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
• Only 1 period (.) can be used and it can only be toward the end of the file name. The program will warn you if you use a period in the wrong spot. 
See Section 3.5 for more details on file names 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.3 Graphs 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph menu command at the top of the Main Screen or clicking on the Summary Graph at the Main Screen. Figure 3.12 shows a typical graph and descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 
Check Appendices 5-9 for several recently added graph features. 
Figure 3.12 Primary Graph Screen Items 
Command buttons. Some commands can only be done through these buttons, some of these buttons just provide a graphical button for performing action of some menu items. 
Menu bar provides for several graph commands and options. 
Graph Title, which can be changed by clicking on Format, then Edit 
Titles/Legend. 
Name of current Test File containing all flow data and specs Graph Legend, which describes the data graphed. This includes Name of the Test Results file, Type of Data, which data goes with which file, if any multiplier is applied to the data. You can also click on Data Type names and the corresponding data line will flash. This is useful to find a particular line when several are graphed. In the Pro version, names in the Legend can be changed by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/Legend. 



Horizontal X axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily changed as 

Grid lines. The style or elimination of grid lines can be changed by clicking on 
Format, then Grid Style. 
Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 
Vertical Y axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily changed as described in this section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
There are 2 basic types of data which can be graphed: 
• 
Cam Data like cam lift, cam acceleration, etc. 

• 
Valve Data like valve lift, valve acceleration, etc. 


For these 2 data types, you can select intake and or exhaust lift, velocity, acceleration and jerk; and various scaling and filtering options, which are set in the Graph Options menu.  See Figure 3.13. 
Graph Type 
Several types of graphs can be picked by clicking on the down arrow key of this combo box to select Intake, Exhaust or both for graphing Cam or Valve Data. 
Graph Lift Graph Velocity Graph Acceleration Graph Jerk 
Pick Yes for any of these 4 data types and that data will be included in the graph. 
Lift is the Cam Lift data either kept as cam lift or converted to Valve Lift based on the specified lash and Rocker Arm Ratio in the Test Setup specs. 
Velocity is the rate of change of lift, or the derivative of lift (in mathematical terms).  The units are Inches per cam degree. 
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity, or the derivative of velocity (in mathematical terms).  The units are Inches per cam degree per cam degree (inches/deg2). 
Jerk is the rate of change of acceleration, or the derivative of acceleration (in mathematical terms).  The units are Inches per cam degree per cam degree per cam degree (inches/deg3). 

Table 3.3 Units of Measure for Cam Data 

Data Type  Units of Measure  
Lift  inches  
Velocity  inches/cam degree  
Acceleration  inches/cam degree/cam degree (inches/cam degree2)  
Jerk  inches/cam degree/cam degree/cam degree (inches/cam degree3)  

Velocity Scale Factor Acceleration Scale Factor Jerk Scale Factor 
Click on these combo boxes to pick the number by which velocity, acceleration or jerk will be multiplied by.  If you pick 1 (no change), then these data types will be graphed exactly as they are calculated, which is quite small compared to lift.  See Figure 
3.14. If you are only graphing, say velocity, it is usually best to select a Scale Factor of 1 (no change).  Then you can read the velocity directly off the graph. However, if you include velocity with valve or cam lift, then a multiplier of 20 to 100 works well.  Table 3.4 shows some recommendations for Scale Factors. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Table 3.4 Recommended Scale Factors 

Data Type  Recommended Scale Factor When Graphing with Lift Also  
Velocity  50  
Acceleration  100  
Jerk  500  


Filter Specs 
Lift Filtering 
Cam analysis almost always requires various amounts of filtering or smoothing of measured data. That is because minor measurement errors exist in the cam lift or crank degree measurements, even those done with very precise instruments.  The effect of these small measurement errors are greatly magnified when velocity and acceleration calculations are made. 
Figure 3.15 gives some idea of how the lift curve and data would look with various amounts of 
(as done when Lift  (as done when Lift  (as done for either type  
Filtering = None and  Filtering = None and  of data measured by  
program is analyzing  program is analyzing cam  computer or by hand.)  
computer measured file  lift data recorded by hand.)  
   like Cam Dr.)        


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
filtering.  Note that Figure 
3.15 is somewhat exaggerated so the idea of filtering can be seen. 
Choose None, and the cam lift data entered by hand is only smoothed one time.  Cam lift data from computerized cam measurement systems (like a Cam Dr file) is not smoothed.  (Precise computerized measurements may not require additional smoothing.)  Choosing None for computerized cam files may be best so you can more accurately see what the 

computerized cam measurement systems actually measured, or to find defects measured in the actual cam lobe. 
Figure 3.17 Cam Lift Curves from Cam Dr File (measured by computer instruments) Lift Filtering = None Lift Filtering = Some 

By choosing Some, the program will perform additional filtering (smoothing) of the cam lift profile.  This additional filtering will be barely noticeable in the lift graphs or reports. However it does have a significant impact on calculated velocity, acceleration and jerk.  Figure 3.16 shows how additional filtering also smoothes out the acceleration curves.  For this reason, additional filtering is always recommended when a Cam Dr (tm) file is created.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
The advantages of additional filtering include: 
• 
Filtering can reduce the effect of minor measurement errors. 

• 
The resulting cam lift profile (and velocity and acceleration) should be more like what the cam grinder intended to grind.   

• 
You can preview the cam profile created when you make a Cam Dr file. 


The disadvantages to additional filtering include: 
• 
Additional calculation time is required for reports and graphs. 

• 
Possibility of "smoothing over" some real defect in a cam profile. See Figure 3.17. 


Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering 
This combo box lets you add additional filtering (smoothing) to only the velocity, acceleration and jerk data.  Usually, these data types require at least Some filtering, with Moderate and Heavy required sometimes with Acceleration and usually with Jerk.  Figure 3.18 shows the effect of additional filtering on Velocity and Acceleration. 

As a “rule of thumb”, you want to use the minimum filtering available that still produces relatively smooth data graphs.  Do NOT over-filter by specifying more filtering than you need.   
Figure 3.18 shows some roughness in Acceleration when Filtering = None, however Velocity looks good.  Setting Filtering = Moderate definitely smoothed out the Acceleration graph, but perhaps too much.  Velocity is probably definitely over-filtered. Figure 3.18 shows that the Velocity data is probably most accurate with Filtering = None, and the Acceleration data would probably be best with Filtering = Some. 
Table 3.5 Recommended Filtering 

Type of Data Graphed  Recommended Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering  
Velocity  None, sometimes Some  
Acceleration  Some, sometimes Moderate  
Jerk  Moderate to Heavy  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Graphs Comparing More Than 1 Test 
There are 3 basic types of cam files which can be graphed: 
• 
Current cam results. These are the cam results of the cam file which you are working with on the Main Screen. 

• 
Tests marked in the History Log. These are the cam results which you previously graphed, started new, opened, etc. which you have marked “Yes” to graph in the History Log  (see Section 3.7). 

• 
Add Test lets you pick any cam from the Test Library to add to the top of the History Log, and mark as a cam you want to graph.  Since it is at the top of the History Log, it should definitely be included in the next graph. 


You can compare data from up to 6 cams, as long as there is room for the Legends (labels) for each graph on the right side of the graph. Usually this ends up being about 24 graph lines, which could be 6 cams with 4 graph lines (for example, Int & Exh Valve Lift and Valve Acceleration). 
Figure 3.19 History Log (See Section 3.7 for more details.) Click on the History Button or the History menu item to display the History Log. Click on Single Test to graph only the Current Test. 

Click on Add Test to pick a new test to add the graph to the History Log from the entire Test Library. 
Choose a ‘Graph’ option from the menu bar to close the History Log and graph the tests identified by the menu option you pick. 
Click in this column 
This column shows the Click and drag slide bar toto show  Yes or Standard name the program display entire History Log.
remove Yes.  Tests will display in graph Legend for Some tests marked Yes marked Yes will be this test.  Click on the name to may be at the bottom of thegraphed, if there is change it. Alternate names Log and not be visible now.
room (typically not 
are possible by clicking on
more than 24 graph 
Format, then Edit Titles.
lines total). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several other features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 

• 
Shifting (advancing/retarding) lobes with respect to each other 


These are discussed in this next section. 
Printing 
Figure 3.20 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  Figure 3.21 shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup.  Figure 3.22 shows how you can add information to a graph printout by clicking on Format, then Edit Printed Comments and Data Output. 

Figure 3.20 Printing Graphs Clicking on the Printer button is the same as clicking on File and then Print Color. Click on File to display the 3 print menu options Click here to print the graph in color (solid lines). Click here to print the graph in black & white (various styles of dashed and solid lines). Click here change the printer or printer driver, page orientation, etc.  
Figure 3.21 Standard Windows Printer Options  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.22 Adding Information to a Graph Printout . (Most of these options have no effect on the graph on the screen, only the graph that is printed.) 

and disabled on this screen. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places.  See Figure 3.23 for explaining the use of the cursor. 

Figure 3.23 Cursor Features and Commands 
Cursor line, usually pink or green, depending on 

Click here to turn cursor ON. 
background color. Click here to turn cursor OFF. 
Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or right.  Hold down the <shift key> while clicking these buttons and the cursor moves faster.  You can enable the cursor by clicking on View, then Turn Cursor On. 


The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 

The X value of the cursor is shown here, in this case the Crank Degrees of 390. 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph line at a data point. This also provides a quick way to move the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Changing titles and legend names 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by displaying and printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure 3.24 which will allow you to do this. 
Figure 3.24 Menu to Edit Title and Legend 
This is the list of Standard names the program uses unless you click on the Use New Titles button below. Select (click on) a Standard name you want to change.  The Standard Name appears in the edit box, along with the current New name if there is one. Once you have selected a name from this list (that row will be highlighted) it is easier to use the up and down arrow keys to select the next item to edit than clicking the item with the mouse. 
This is the list of New names the program will use if you click on Use New Titles. If a title in the List of New Names is blank, the program will use the Standard name. 
Standard name from row selected. 
New name for you to edit. Other options include clicking on the Copy Std Name to New or Blank Out New Name buttons. 


Click here to close this menu and use the New names you have entered. Where New names have been left blank, the Standard name will be used. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph.  The Pro has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures 3.25 and 3.26. 


Figure 3.26 Menu to Specify Graph Axes Scales This menu can be obtained 2 ways. You can click on View in the menu bar then Specify Scales (axes), or click on the Set Scales button, the right most button on the graph screen. 
The current scale limits are loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. 
Click on OK to have the graph redrawn to these new scale limits. 
Click the Turn Autoscaling Off button to turn Autoscaling Off to enable changing specs in this menu. (Its shown disabled here because it has already been turned Off 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Shifting (advancing/retarding) Graphs 
Many times you may want to realign 1 graph with respect to another, for example to line up centerlines or velocity peaks, etc. The Cam Analyzer allows you to shift (advance or retard) one or any lobe on the graph, as shown in figure 3.27. 
Figure 3.27 Showing Options to Shift (advance/retard) Data from 1 File Over Another File 
Click here to shift Exhaust lobe to left (advance it). 
Click here to shift Exhaust 

Click here to lobe to right shift Exhaust 
(retard it). 
and Intake lobes togetherClick here to 
to left shift Intake 
(advancelobe to left 
entire cam). (advance it). Click here to 
Click here to shift Exhaust shift Intake and Intake lobe to right lobes together (retard it). to right (retard 
entire cam). 

To switch to a different file, click on one of the graph data types for that file The file you are shifting is highlighted by printing the name in bright pink. 

The number of degrees each lobe has been shifted is displayed here. Click on View for other Shift options. 
Click here to show the amount you have shifted each 
Click here to return the graph to its “unshifted” original condition. Note that the program remembers the amount of shifting for the displayed lobes until you close the graph screen, open the History Log, or pick different file(s) to graph. 
Click here to zero out the amount of shifting you have done. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.4 Printer Output 
The Cam Analyzer can print the tabular cam results of a Report for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer icon.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.28 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the Option boxes.  All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 
Figure 3.28 Printer Button and Print Menu Command Options - Report Screen 
Click on Print or the Printer button (shown hidden here) for the Printout Options menu shown to the right. 
This options lets you choose the printer or printer driver being used by Windows and also page orientation. 

Check or uncheck these options, then click on this button to print the current report with these options. 
Check or uncheck these options, then click on this button to print a blank paper worksheet. This worksheet can be useful for recording data when your engine can not be next to your computer. 

Test Results Report Options 
Include Cam Number, Operator Include Test Conditions Include Test Comments Request Report Comment 
Select these options if you want all the specs from these menus printed with the Report.  This may add 1-2 pages to the printed Report. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Include Test Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the Test File printed with the results. 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular Report you send to the printer.  These "Report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like modifications, engine results, etc. 
Larger Font (Print Size) 
Check this option if your particular printer is printing the results with a small print font.  This option will increase the font size for some parts of some Reports.  Also see Preferences for Selecting Printer Fonts, page 26. 
Worksheet Options 
These options let you print a blank paper worksheet.  This worksheet can be useful for recording data when your engine, dial indicator and degree wheel setup can not be next to your computer. 
Stock Cam (260 degree duration) Perf Cam (360 degree duration) Race Cam (500 degree duration) 
Check the option which best match the cam you will measure.  The only problem with estimating a larger cam than you have is that the printout may be longer than you need and you may waste some paper. 
Larger Space Between Lines 
Select this option if you want more space between lines, so you can write your numbers larger. 
Ask for Worksheet Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for to be printed at the top of your worksheet. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Other Print Options 
Other menus have print menu commands or print buttons as shown in Figures 3.29 and 3.30. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



3.5 Data Libraries 
Check Appendices 6-9 for new features for opening and Filtering (finding) files.  
The Cam Analyzer allows you to save a set of Cam Data and related specs (Test Setup and Cam Specs, etc) to the Test File Library under a name of your choosing.  You can then open these cam files out of the Test File Library in the future for comparison or modification.  The Open window is below with explanations. 
Figure 3.31 Test Library Options 
Click on File, then Open (from all saved tests) to display Test Library shown here. 
Name of chosen Test (currently highlighted in Test List) 
Click and drag slide bar to view all Tests in list 
Preview of Test chosen 
Single click on a Test to choose it for preview. Double click to immediately open it. 


Tests can be saved under various categories (folders) to help you organize large #s of tests. Click on a different name here and a different list of Test Files will be displayed. The name “Folder” can be changed in the Preferences menu to most any word. 

Windows File Open screen, to let you open a file in most any folder

Click here to bring up “on screen” help. 
(directory) and disk drive. See Figure 3.32 B. 
Click here to close the Test Library with No changes (without opening a test) 
Click here to open the chosen Test 
Select one of these options to list the test files alphabetically, either by test file name, or by cam 
#. This option can save you time looking for a particular test file. 
delete the chosen Test. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Open a Test File 
To open a cam file saved in the Test Library, click on File at the upper left corner of the Main Screen, then on the Open (from all saved cams).  You also have an additional option of  “Open (from History Log)” which will be discussed in Section 3.7. 
You will obtain the window shown on the previous page.  Single click on one of the cams in the list, or click and drag the slide button on the right side of the list to display more cams.  Once you single click on a cam, it is now the Chosen Test File and a preview of the cam is given in the Preview section.  If the file you chose was not a valid Cam Analyzer file (either Windows v2.0 or the older v1.1 for DOS), or not another cam file format the program recognizes (Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, etc.) the program will tell you and you can not choose it.  See Section 3.6 on Opening Other Cam File Formats. 
Once a cam has been chosen, you can delete it by clicking on the Delete button, or Open it by clicking on the Open button in this window.  You can also click on a different cam to Preview it or close this window and return to the Main Screen without choosing a new cam file. 
If you are sure of the cam you want to open, you can simply double click on it from the Test List.  This opens the cam without a preview and closes this menu. 
Save a Test File 
Before you discuss saving a cam file, it is important for you to understand how the program opens and uses cam files.  When you open a cam from the Test Library, you are only using a copy of the cam.  The original cam file is kept in the library.   
As you make changes to the cam, they are only made to this copy.  The original file is not changed.  If you want to delete your changes, you can simply open a fresh, unchanged copy of the original cam file from the Library.  If you want to keep your changes, you must save them. This can be done by clicking on File, then Save.  You are also asked if you want to save your changes whenever you open a new cam, and the program has detected you have made changes to the current file. 
To save a Test File, you will be presented with the Save Window as shown on the next page.  The program suggests a new cam name which is the same as the current cam name shown at the top of the Main Screen.  If you want to save your changes to the same name, simply click on OK.  This will update the current cam file with your latest changes. 
If you want to save the current set of cam specs with your changes to a new name (and leave the current cam file in the Library unchanged), then click on the suggested file name and modify it as you want.  For example, in the window shown on the next page, you may want to add -2 to the current name XDRAG.PTI to create XDRAG.P-2 to indicate this is the 2nd revision of XDRAG.PTI. This is the safest way to make changes, because you can always return to an earlier version and see what you had done. 
Certain file names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names with more than 3 characters to the right or 8 characters to the left of a period (.) . 

• 
Names over 11 characters long (12 characters if one is a period). 

• 
Names which include the characters: 

• 
Names with lower case letters.  These letters will be converted to upper case once the file is saved. 


/  \  [  ]  :  |  <  >  +  =  ;  ,  *  ? or spaces 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.32 Saving Test File Options 

New name to save test data to. Leave unchanged and click OK to save to the current test name. (This would be the same as clicking on File, then Save.) Click on name in the box to change it, then click OK 
Name of current test file you are 
working with. 
Click on the down arrow button to pick a different folder to save this test to.  Note that the top choice in this list is “Add New Folder”. Pick this option and then you can type in a new folder name, This new folder name will be added to the list so that you can save the test file to that folder if you wish.  The word “folder” can be changed to most any word in the Preferences menu. 
Type in a New Folder Name here if you select “Add New Folder” as the Folder Name. 
Click here to bring up standard Windows File Save screen, to let you save a file in most any folder (directory) and disk drive, and to most any file name. Note that files saved this way are not found in the standard Test Library. See Figure 3.32 B 
Test files are saved to folders (directories) you have created in the CAMDATA folder (directory) in the CA20 folder (directory) under PERFTRNS.PTI folder (directory).  You can copy Windows Cam Analyzer files from programs on other computers to this folder (directory) and they will be found by the program.  The Windows Version 2.0 will read files produced with the older DOS v1.1. Just copy them into a folder under the CAMDATA folder (other than the Examples folder) using Windows Explorer. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Advance Open or Save Screen 
If you click on the Advanced button in either the Open or Save As screen, you will obtain the screen shown in Figure 3.32 B.  From here you can access most and file on the computer on most any disk drive. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.6 Opening Other Cam File Formats 
The Cam Analyzer can read several different cam file formats, including: 
• Cam Dr File 
Figure 3.33 Opening a Different Cam File Format
• Cam Pro File 
Click on most any file in the library
• Comp Cam's File 
If the Cam Analyzer
• Dr Doctor 
recognized the format,
• S96 File 
it will be shown here.
• Andrews File 
You basically try to open one of these files the way you open any other Cam Analyzer file.  If it is not a Cam Analyzer file, the program checks if it is one of these other formats. If so, it tells you in the test summary as shown in Figure 3.33.   
If you copy this other cam file into a folder in the CAMDATA folder (anything other than the EXAMPLES folder), you can open it by clicking on File, then Open (from all saved tests) at the Main Screen.  You will obtain the menu shown in Figure 3.33.  If this other cam file is not in a folder in the CAMDATA folder, you must used the Advanced button to search anywhere on the computer (also shown in Figure 3.32 B). 
When you actually open this other type of cam file, the program presents the screen of Figure 3.34.  Here you enter some basic information the program needs to convert this file into a standard Cam Analyzer file. 
Click on Advanced to open a file from somewhere other than the standard cam library (folders in the CAMDATA folder). 
IMPORTANT: The Cam 

Analyzer does NOT work with or modify the original file it reads.  Instead, it creates a new Cam Analyzer file based on the data in this other type of cam file. 
Lifter Type 
Click on this combo box  to select a description for this cam profile. Depending on whether you select a hydraulic or solid profile, you may or may not be able to enter valve lash. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
For Which Type Lobe 
If the file contains only 1 cam lobe (intake or exhaust) like an S96 file, pick which type of lobe you want this file stored as. 
Keep File Lobe Separation 
If the file contains 2 lobes (both intake and exhaust) like a Cam Dr file, select if you want to keep the lobe separation between the 2 lobes that was measured.  If you select Yes, then Exhaust Centerline is disabled, because the Intake Centerline and measured lobe separation will dictate where the Exhaust Centerline lies. If you select No, then Exhaust Centerline is enabled so you can enter it. 
Assign to This Cyl # 
Pick the cylinder # you want assigned to this lobe.  This is mostly for record keeping for your own information. 
Int Rocker Arm Ratio Int Valve Lash Int Centerline Exh Rocker Arm Ratio Exh Valve Lash Exh Centerline Total Cam Advance 
These entries are provided so they can be used in the Test Setup specs for the Cam Analyzer file which will be created. 
Cam File Name & Folder 
File Name 
Is the file name of the new Cam Analyzer file which will be created.  As with other file names in the Cam Analyzer, certain file names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names with more than 3 characters to the right or 8 characters to the left of a period (.) . 

• 
Names over 11 characters long (12 characters if one is a period). 

• 
Names which include the characters: 

• 
Names with lower case letters.  These letters will be converted to upper case once the file is saved. 


/  \  [  ]  :  |  <  >  +  =  ;  ,  *  ? or spaces 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Folder 
Select the folder where the new Cam Analyzer file will be saved.  This list will consist of existing folders in the CAMDATA folder (the standard Cam Analyzer library), plus the Add New option.  Pick this option and you can enter a New Folder name for storing the new file.   
Note:  The file must be saved into a folder in the Cam Analyzer library (folders in the CAMDATA folder).  If you need it to go somewhere else, you must move it using Windows Explorer or the Save As, then Advanced commands in the Cam Analyzer.  You can also use the Save to Floppy Disk mentioned in section 2.1. 
New Folder Name 
Only becomes activated if you have selected the Add New option for Folder above. 
Check Appendix 5 and 6 for features letting your export data files in different formats.  Also check Appendix 6 for new features for combining lobes from 2 different cam files. Check Appendices 5-9 for all the latest features. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



3.7 History Log 
Click on File, then Open from History Log at the Main Screen to obtain the History Log shown below in Figure 3.35.  This screen shows a summary of the results for the last 25-100 cams you have worked with (started new, opened, graphed, etc.)  The number of cams in the log (25-100) is selectable in the 'Preferences' menu at the Main Screen.  When you work with a new cam, it is added to the top of the History Log, and (if the Log is full) the last run drops off the bottom of the list. ,The History Log is an alternate way to Open cams which have been saved to the Test Library.  The advantage of the History Log is it lists the cams you most recently worked with at the top.   

From this screen you can Open a cam file by clicking on the 'Test File and Path' column (first column on the left).  If the cam file was saved to a standard folder (directory, or whatever you have chosen to call folders in the Preferences menu), the folder name is given first, followed by the cam file name. 
If a cam file has been Opened from or Saved to a non-standard folder (a folder not in the CAMDATA folder) using the 'Advanced' function, the entire path is given.  If the 'Path and File Name' won't fit, it is shortened and preceded by '...'. 
You can choose to Save certain results you believe are special and you may want to recall or graph in the future by clicking on the Save column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Save eventually move to the bottom of the History Log, but are never dropped off the list or erased until you again click on the Yes to make it blank. 
Note that just the Test File Name stays in the History Log.  Should you delete the file using the Open (from all saved cams) command, the cam file will be deleted.  When you try to open it or graph if from the History Log, you will get note saying the file can not be found. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
You can print the History Log on a printer by clicking on the 'Print' menu command.   Note that the History Log will be most readable when the Page Orientation is in Landscape setting. 
The Max Lifts and Durations at .050”  listed in the History Log are handy to remind you what a cam was, and for comparing different cams. 
History Log at Graph Screen 
At the Graph Screen, several options are available to graph selected cams from the History Log, and change the Graph Titles.   You can obtain the History Log by clicking on the menu command History Log at the top of the Graph Screen.  The History Log is how you graph different cams together for comparison.  From this screen you can: 
• 
Choose to Graph certain Test Results by clicking on the Graph column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Graph will be graphed when you click on the 'Graph Tests Marked 'Yes' '.  The first cam (usually the current Cam Test you are working with) is always graphed even with no Yes marked.  The number of cams actually graphed are limited by available space, usually a limit of about 24 graph lines total.  

• 
Graph only the current cam results (the cam file at the top of the Log) by clicking on 'Graph Current Test Only'. 

• 
Click on 'Graph Title' to change the Standard Title for this cam.  The program defaults to putting in the Cam # unless it is blank, when it then puts in the cam file name.  (You can also specify 'Alternate' titles and legend names by clicking on 'Format' at the top of the Graph Screen, then 'Edit Titles/Legends'.)   

• 
Choose to Save certain results you believe are special and you may want to recall or graph in the future.  See the Save explanation of the previous page. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.8 Create Cam Dr File 
This command will display the menu shown in Figure 3.37.  The Cam Dr (tm) is a popular computerized cam measurement tool.  It stores its data on disk so it can be retrieved later for analysis by the Cam Dr's software, or used in other software.  Performance Trends' Engine Analyzer’ Pro' can read a Cam Dr file to precisely simulate valve train dynamics and engine performance with your exact cam profile.  Therefore, if you want to create a cam profile file of the current Cam File shown on the Main Screen, you would use this command. 
Check Appendices 5-9 for several new features for creating new data file formats. 

Format 
Is the type of Cam File to create.  In this version, all formats are Cam Dr formats.  Your only choice is the extension, C1 to C16 identifying which cylinder the file represents. 
File Name 
Is the name you will give to the file.  The name can only be up to 8 characters long and not include any spaces or the characters:   /  \  [  ] :  |  <  >  +  =  ;  ,  *  ? 
File Destination Path 
The File Destination Path  simply tell the Cam Analyzer where to store the Cam Dr file on disk.  For example, if you were going to use the file in the Engine Analyzer 'Pro', you would store it in the 'Pro's CAMFILES folder.  Figure 3.37 shows the proper destination specs for using the Cam Dr file with the Engine Analyzer 'Pro' if the 'Pro' is stored in its default location (c:\perftrns.pti\eap). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Include .MSU and .DES Files 
A Cam Dr file created by the Cam Dr software usually consists of 3 computer files.  The most important one contains the cam lift profile and has the computer name extension of .CXX.  The XX is a number from 1 to 16 which stands for cylinder #.  This extension you select with the Format option.   
Two additional files are created which include a .MSU file for Measurement Set Up and a .DES file with the cam DEScription. Some programs may not need the .MSU and .DES files, like the Engine Analyzer 'Pro'.  Therefore, it is a waste of time and disk space to create and store these files. Therefore, to create files for use in the Engine Analyzer 'Pro', you would set this spec to No. 
Smooth the Cam Data 
A powerful feature of the Cam Analyzer is the ability of it to mathematically “smooth out” data recorded by hand so that it appears as accurate as data recorded by computerized instruments. This is much more than typical filtering that other computer programs can do. This accuracy is required for detailed work like simulating valve train dynamics in the Engine Analyzer Pro.  Therefore, for almost all situations it is recommended you select Yes for this option. 
However, sometimes users want the Cam Dr file to be exactly the same data as they have entered by hand.  In that case, you can select No and no smoothing will be done to the data before the file is written. 
Note:  You must set the Preferences option of Allow Not Smoothing Cam File to Yes before this option is visible.  See Section 2.2, Preferences. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Chapter 4 Examples 
Each example in this chapter becomes progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated.  
The results shown in these examples may be somewhat different than what you obtain with your particular version of the program That is due to minor upgrades in the calculations in later versions. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.1 Running A Cam Test By Entering Cam Lift Measurements Directly Into The Computer, With TDC Procedure 
This example demonstrates the basic steps for running a cam measurement test. Specifically the test is of a solid roller cam for drag racing with approximately 280 intake/294 exhaust duration and 104 degrees lobe separation.  The file being created is actually the XDRAG.PTI Cam Test file in the Examples folder, but we will call it CC8094-SR04.   
The Cam Analyzer program works best if the computer can be next to the engine as the test is being performed.  This allows the computer to easily assist in setting the engine to TDC, and immediate checking (and possibly correcting) of Cam Lift entries with graphs. 
The Cam Analyzer has several options for filling in cam data on the Test Data grid.  The particular steps given below are not the only way to run this cam. 
In Windows 95 or 98, start the program by clicking on Start, then Programs, then Perf Trends, then Cam Analyzer v2.0.  When you enter the Cam Analyzer, you may see the question in Figure 4.1.  If you answer No, you will start with a blank screen.  If you answer Yes, the program will put you back to precisely where you were when you last quit the program.  Even though you are starting a New Test, click on Yes to bring up the last cam you were working with. 

Click on File (upper left corner), then New Test to bring up the New Test screen, which will likely show a Tip message.  See Figure 4.2.  As the Tip in Figure 4.2 says, it is easier to start with a Cam Test file that is close to the cam to be measured.  This prevents us from having to make major changes to cam information like the Test Setup and Cam Specs, etc.  However, since you have not measured a cam like this one, you can start this cam with whatever the Current Test is. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.3 
4 Critical specs for the new test are listed here at the top. Click here to start a New Test based on these settings. 

The New Test screen appears as in Figure 4.3.  There are 4 critical specs at the top which must be filled out or picked. 
Filling Out Specs to Start a New Test 
If you want to check or modify some specs from the previous cam, click on the 'See Specs' buttons for Test Setup.  Click on Help at this menu for more info on how to enter these specs. 
Two critical specs 
A summary of the current Test Setup settings is given here. 
Click on this button to see the current Test Setup settings. 
You can edit the current comments here for the new test. 


Click here to Check or Uncheck options. Checking means you want to keep these comments for the new test. Once the new test is started you can then make modifications to these specs if you want.  (Test Setup must remain checked.) 
in the Test Setup include the Degree Wheel Type and # Deg (number of degrees between readings).  The summary shows that these settings are for “Degree Wheel Type: TDC - 90 - BDC - 90 - TDC in 5 degree steps for a solid lifter (follower) cam” are correct for the test you will be running, so you don’t have to change them.  You also change the test comments to something more meaningful for this new test,  about the cam being for Jeff Johnson’s BB Chevy. 
Most specs can be changed once the cam has started with little problem. However, there are four other critical specs listed separately at the top. These must be filled out before you can start the new cam:  
1. File Name for New Test is the file name the program will create for saving the Cam Data for the new cam you are starting. The program fills in a default name of the current cam name, but incrementing the last digit in the name by 1.  You can 
change this name to most anything you like.  The program will warn you if the name entered is not valid and show you what is wrong.  For this example, type in the name:  CC8094-SR04 for this cam. This could stand for a Competition Cam's cam with specs of 280 intake and 294 exhaust duration @ .050".  The "SR4" could stand for a Solid Roller with a 104 degree lobe separation.  Develop a method of naming cam files which fits your needs. 
2. Operator for New Test is the name of the operator for this cam.  Click on Pick to pick an operator name already used or to enter a new name.  The program defaults to the operator of the current cam.  Through the Operator Menu discussed in Section 2.1, you enter a new Operator name of Jack. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
3. Cam # for New Test is critical for shops who use a cam numbering system.  Click on Assign to create a new Cam # based on the last Cam # assigned (incremented up by 1) or to start with a new type of Cam #. Through the Cam # Menu discussed in Section 2.1, you enter a new Cam # of CCSR0047.  If you do not want to be  forced into a certain format for entering cam numbers, or want to be able to leave the Cam Number entry blank, choose that Preference in the Preferences 
menu described in 
Section 2.2. 
4. Folder Name for New Test is the folder in the CAMDATA folder where the cam will be saved. The program may not be using the name 'folder' for this spec, but whatever word you have assigned in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen. The folder name 'Examples' is reserved for Performance Trends example cams supplied with the program, and can not be used for your cams. By clicking on Add New, you add the new folder of BB-CHEV for this cam. 
The New Test screen should now look like Figure 4.4.  When you are ready to start the New Test, click on 'Start New Test' at the top of the screen. If some critical specs 

have not been entered, the program will warn you and ask you for it at that time. The program will fill in the Test Time and Date based on the computer's time and date.  This can be changed later by clicking on the Test Time/Date at the Main Screen. 
Figure  4.5 shows the Main Screen you get from starting a New Test.  There are no Degree Wheel readings generated and the Cam Lift column is blank. 
Procedure to Find TDC 
If you simply want cam profile data (duration, overlap, lobe area, etc.) or to create a Cam Dr file for use in other software, an accurate TDC is not critical. Then you can skip the procedure to set TDC.  TDC is critical if you want to know how this particular cam is timed in this engine.  Then all 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Cam Analyzer calculations including lobe centerline, opening and closing events at .050" lift, etc. will be accurate. For background on how the Finding TDC procedure works, see Section 2.4. 
Click on the Find TDC command at the top of the Main Screen, shown in Figure 4.5 to obtain the screen shown in Figure 4.6. 
You must first “Select the Method to Determine TDC”, the method you will use to determine piston position on either side of TDC, either: 
Method 1 uses a dial indicator to measure out 2 points on either side of TDC.  A disadvantage of Method 1 is that the heads must be removed (or you 

need a special dial indicator which can access the piston dome through the spark plug hole.) 
Method 2 uses a mechanical stop in the cylinder or head.  A stop can be a stiff bar bolted to the engine deck as shown in Figure 2.17 on page 29. Or it can be a spark plug body with the porcelain removed and a bolt welded in its place  This type can be used with the head installed, but can bend (introducing errors), damage a piston with a complicated dome, or not work at all depending on spark plug installation angle. The stop will contact the piston at the same distance from TDC with the crank on either side of TDC.  Two disadvantages of Method 2 include: 
• 
Possible damage to the piston if too much force is used to seat the piston against the stop. 

• 
Depending on the design of stop, you may have to remove and adjust or file the stop if the degree wheel readings do not fall into the range allowed by the Cam Analyzer.  


1) For this example, we will use Method 1, so select the Dial Indicator method.  You will notice that as each step is answered, the next step becomes enabled so you can answer it. 
2) Set Approximate TDC and Zero.  This step is to get the degree wheel in the “ball park” so you can take some readings to find exact TDC.  Position #1's piston to the highest point in the bore (approximately TDC).  Install your degree wheel on the crank and pointer to read approximately TDC.  Install your dial indicator and set it to read approximately .000".  Choose 'Done' when done. 
3) Enter Reading at .050", ATDC. Rotate the crank CLOCKWISE until the dial indicator reads exactly .050".  Enter the degree wheel reading at this point.  Note that the direction of rotation and the number you enter are displayed on the degree wheel drawing.  The pointer reads 22 deg after TDC on the wheel, so enter 22. 
4) Enter Reading at .050", BTDC. Rotate the crank COUNTER-CLOCKWISE until the dial indicator again reads exactly  .050" on the other side of TDC.  The pointer reads 17 deg before TDC on the wheel, so enter 17. 
5)Rotate Crank to Read 2.5 ATDC. Now the program has enough data to “split the difference’ in the 2 readings you have entered.  When you rotate the crank to the reading calculated by the program (2.5 degrees After TDC), the piston will be exactly at TDC. WITHOUT LOOSENING the degree wheel or adjusting the pointer, rotate the crank CLOCKWISE until the pointer reads the number as shown in Step 5 above.  Cyl #1's piston is now exactly at TDC.  Choose 'Done' when done.  See Figure 4.8. 
6) Adjust Pointer/Wheel to Read TDC.  Now you can adjust the pointer or degree wheel to read TDC so they exactly match the piston’s TDC position. WITHOUT MOVING CRANK OR PISTON, adjust the pointer (or loosen and rotate the degree wheel) until the pointer and wheel read exactly TDC.  Choose 'Done' when done. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now you have the degree wheel reading TDC when the piston is positioned at TDC.  If you want, you can now enter an operator name, like Jack, and any comment about the TDC procedure.  You can now also print this data for a permanent record.   
Click on the OK (keep data) button and this data is also stored with the Cam Analyzer file so you can review it or print it in the future.  You will be returned to the Main Screen.  Nothing in the program has changed, except now the degree wheel accurately reads crank position. 
Generating 

Degree Wheel Readings 
As shown in Figure 4.5, you can click on the Generate Degree Wheel button to fill in all the degree wheel readings automatically to obtain the menu shown in Figure 4.9.  You have already specified that you will take readings every 5 degrees in the Test Setup specs. However, the program needs to know where you will take your first reading.  
At this time, mount your dial indicator base to the engine deck and set your dial probe on the intake tappet of Cylinder #1.  You should have the rocker arm and pushrod removed so little pressure is placed on the lifter causing deflection or hydraulic lifter "bleed down".   

indicator must be exactly in line with the lifter bore for accurate Cam Lift measurements.  You may also need an extension for the dial indicator probe.  Some cam grinders sell tools to make this job easier and more accurate. 
Note:  If you measure Cam Lift from the pushrod, be sure the dial indicator probe sets into the pushrod's oil hole and the guide plate holds the pushrod close to its "installed" location and angle.  Measuring cam lift from the top of the pushrod side of the rocker arm can be difficult and may create errors. See Appendix 1 for tips on accurate measurements. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Rotate the crank until you are on the opposite side of the cam from the "nose".  This ensures you are on base circle.  At this time, set your dial indicator to .000".   
Now start rotating the crank in the direction of normal rotation (clockwise when viewed from the front for most standard rotation engines). You should see very little change on your dial indicator until you get to the opening ramp.  This ramp will not start until around 70 degrees BTDC on the intake. For mild cams it may not start until 30 degrees BTDC, for radical cams it may start at 70 degrees ABDC.  (These values would change for other Degree Wheel Types and for the exhaust lobe.) 
When you have seen approximately .002" Cam Lift from base circle, assume you are starting the opening ramp. Find a point with approximately .002" lift at an even Degree Wheel reading like 70 or 75. This will create regular readings generated at 5 degree increments. 
For this example, .002" lift occurs at 85 degrees BTDC, so we enter 85 for First Degree Wheel Reading and choose BTDC  in Generate Degree Wheel Readings shown in Figure 4.9.  Since this a long duration, race cam, we estimate the duration from about .002” to .002” to be 450 degrees.  (Note that this is much greater than the duration rated at .050” lift.)  If the actual cam is more or less than this, we can easily change it once measuring starts. 
Click on OK (generate degrees) and you are returned to the Main Screen with the Degree Wheel readings column filled in, and starting at 85 degrees ATDC.  See Figure 4.10.  Now you can start recording actual cam lift data. 
Recording Data 
Enter the .002" tappet Cam Lift for the 85 BTDC point.  Then turn the crank to the next Degree Wheel Readings point of 80 BTDC where the dial indicator now reads .005.  Enter .005 in the Cam Lift column for 80 BTDC.  Continue turning the crank to each new Degree Wheel Readings point and enter the Cam Lift reading from the dial indicator. 
Note:  Generally, gravity and the dial indicator spring are enough force to keep the lifter in contact with the cam lobe.  However, you may want to press lightly on the lifter (not disturbing the dial indicator) to keep it in contact with the cam lobe before recording each Cam Lift measurement.  
As you progress, each point is graphed on the Summary Graph to "flag out" errors in the data.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Using EZ Data Entry 
After you have entered at least 2 Cam Lifts, you can click on the EZ Data Entry button to open the EZ Data Entry. This screen can save you considerable time and help you avoid making errors entering data.  See Figure 4.11.  By using the keyboard keys of Insert, down arrow, left arrow and right arrow, the program can estimate the next Cam Lift, and you can fine tune this estimate to within .0005”. 
For example, in Figure 4.11, you have entered .002 at 85 BTDC and .005 at 80 BTDC. A reasonable estimate of the next Cam Lift at 75 BTDC would be .008. If you click on the Estimate Next Lift button (or just press the Insert key), the program will fill in .008” for 75 BTDC.  If the actual dial indicator reading was .009, you could just click on the Nudge Up button (or tap the right arrow key) twice to bump up the estimated lift of .008 to .009.  Each “Nudge” is .0005”.  See Section 
2.7 for more details. 
Continue recording data at every 5 degree interval stated in the Degree Wheel Column or in the EZ Data Entry screen until the lifter returns to approximately .002" Cam Lift or less.  Now you are at the end of the cam profile.  The Cam Lift of .002 actually occurs at 67 BTDC, but you go to 65 BTDC where you record .001" Cam Lift for the last Cam Lift point.   
At this time you may want to delete the extra Degree Wheel points in the Degree Wheel column. This can be done by clicking on Point 78 in the Point column to bring up the Edit menu, shown in Figure 4.12. 
If you ever want to add rows past 78 in the future you can simply click on the Cam Lift column for row 78 (there won’t be a number 78, just a blank) and start typing in a lift.  If the last lifts are greater than .015”, you can also click on Generate Degree Wheel Readings and increase the duration beyond the current duration. 

Figure 4.12 Edit Command to Delete Rows Click here do delete this row and all remaining rows. This brings up Edit menu shown below. 

Click here to actually delete rows. 
If you had clicked on Point #1 (the first row), an Insert button would appear here so you could add rows at the beginning of the cam profile. 

To add rows at the beginning of the profile, click on Point 1 in the Point column, and an Insert button is added to the Edit menu shown in Figure 4.12. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.13 Graph Menu to Check Intake Lobe Choose Intake Cam Data for the Type 
Check your Measurements 
With the intake lobe completed and before you remove the dial indicator, let's check what the Cam Analyzer says about these measurements. 
A good way to check out the Intake Lobe data is to graph the data.  Click on Graph at the top of the Main Screen and the Graph Options menu appears.  A good Type of graph to check the Intake lobe would be Intake Cam Data.  See Figure 4.13. 
Any time a graph or report is made of data you have entered by hand, the program performs “mathematical smoothing”.  During this process, the program can check for cam lifts which seem “out of line” with other the other cam lifts. 
If "bumps" or points which look "out of line" are found in the data file, a message could be given as shown in Figure 4.14.  In this case, cam lift was recorded in error as .138” when it should have been .128”, an error of .010”.  (Also see how this .010” error would look in a velocity and acceleration graph shown in Figure 4.16.) The Cam Analyzer can be quite helpful at screening your data measurements. 

Choose Lift, Velocity and Acceleration for the data to graph 
Choose Scale Factors so Velocity and Acceleration show up well on the graph. 
Since we are recording data by hand, set Lift Filtering to Some. Keep other filtering to a minimum because you are looking for possible problems. 
Having points which are "not smooth" do not necessarily mean errors were made recording Cam Lift data.  These points could mean: 
• 
They could simply be changing direction faster (have higher acceleration rates) than what the Cam Analyzer's smoothing or filtering scheme expects. This is especially possible if you are using Deg Steps of 10 or more rather that the recommended 2, 4 or 5 degrees. 

• 
They could be pointing out an actual "bump" in the cam profile.  This bump may be "smoothed" over and not noticeable in the graphs. See Figure 


3.17 on page 54. 
The actual data point which is "not smooth" may be next to a point which is listed in the "not smooth" screen. For example, Points 15, 16, 17 and 19 are all pointed as “not smooth”, but actually Point 16 is the only one with a problem. 
In any event, these points are ones which you should double check before you move the dial indicator and go to the Exhaust Lobe. For this example, no points were found to be "not smooth".  The Cam Analyzer will produce a graph like Figure 4.15. 
The general shape of these lift, velocity and acceleration curves are the same for most cam profiles, both intake and exhaust lobes. For this first graph, look for any "bumps" in the lift, velocity and acceleration curves.  Bumps are an indication of a 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

potential problem with the cam, the grinding of the cam, or quite likely an error entering data.  Bumps in the lift curve produce larger bumps in the velocity curve which result in even larger bumps in the acceleration curve. Therefore, the acceleration curve will be the most bumpy and most likely to show up problems.  Even though there are some bumps in this acceleration curve, they are normal. 
Since the cam graphs in Figure 4.15 look good, we can do one more quick check.  Click on Back to return to the Main Screen. When there, click on Report at the top of the screen to open up the Report Options menu, Figure 
4.17. Select the Intake Duration report as the Type, then click on the Make Report button. 
You may get a message saying “ONLY 0 DEGREES ON EXHAUST LOBE.”  This makes sense since you have not yet measured the exhaust lobe yet.  When the report is presented, there is a summary at the top showing duration and events at .050” lift, centerlines, etc. 
Eventually, you will get the report of Figure 4.18.  From this report you can check the duration of the intake profile at any particular cam lift.  In addition, all reports give a Summary at the top., which gives events at .050", centerlines, etc.  By comparing these measured events to the cam grinder's specs, you can see if you should double check your measurements.   
For example, if the measured specs are within 2 degrees of the cam grinder's specs, your measurements are probably good.  If they do not agree within 2 degrees, you may want to recheck your Cam Lift data, depending on how critical this cam is.   
If the CLine (centerline), LbSep (lobe separation) or Lift in the Report Summary are out of spec, check your Cam Lift readings in the area around maximum Cam Lift.  If the other readings are out of spec, check in the area around .050" lift on both the opening and closing ramps. If duration is within specs, but the Open, Close or CLine (centerline) are not, you may want to recheck: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
• 
TDC. 

• 
To see if the pointer has moved or degree wheel has slipped. 

• 
That you installed the cam correctly per the timing marks. 

• 
That your timing gears or chain do not have too much wear. 


 Note:  If we were doing measurements every 10 degrees, instead of every 5 degrees, our measurements would not be as accurate.  Then we could only expect to be within, say 3-4 degrees of the cam grinder's specs.  See Appendix 1. 
Table 4.1 compares the cam grinder's duration specs with those actually measured.  Since all Intake specs are within a couple degrees of our measurements, we can assume that our measurements are good.  (It also compares Exhaust specs and measurements, however they have not yet been measured in this example.)   
Note:  Do not be surprised if cams are not ground exactly to the advertised specifications.  Production tolerances make it nearly impossible for cams to be ground exactly to spec at an affordable price. Fortunately, minor changes in cam duration and timing have a relatively small impact on engine performance.  However, small "bumps" on cam profiles can produce abnormally high wear on valve train components. 

Save Measure Data 
Since all our checks of the Intake Lobe look good, we can assume we have not made any major errors measuring the Intake Lobe.  Click on Back in the Report Screen of 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Table 4.1 Measured Cam Data versus Cam Grinder's Specs 
Spec  Cam Analyzer  Grinder's Specs  
Lobe Lift  Int .469  Int .470  
Lobe Lift  Exh .423  Exh .420  
Duration @ .050  Int 280.8  Int 280  
Duration @ .050  Exh 293.8  Exh 294  
Duration @ .200  Int 193.8  Int 194  
Duration @ .200  Exh 196.8  Exh 196  
Lobe Separation  104.5  104  
Opening @ .050  Int 36.6  Int 36  
Opening @ .050  Exh 72.7  Exh 72  
Closing @ .050  Int 64.2  Int 64  
Closing @ .050  Exh 41.1  Exh 42  

Measure Exhaust Lobe 
To start measuring the Exhaust lobe, click on the Exhaust #1 tab at the top of the Main Screen. 
DO NOT REMOVE THE DEGREE WHEEL FROM THE CRANK OR ADJUST THE DEGREE WHEEL OR POINTER.  
This ensures you keep cam timing between the intake and exhaust lobes the same. Move the dial indicator to the exhaust lifter and rotate the cam until the lifter is opposite the nose of the exhaust cam.  Now set the dial indicator to .000. 
Rotate the crank clockwise until you find an even 5 degree reading on the opening ramp.  For this cam a Degree Wheel Readings reading of 20 ATDC gives a dial indicator reading of .002".  (Note that this is extremely early and most cams will start much later.)  Click on Generate Degree Wheel Readings as done with the Intake Lobe, and enter 20 and ATDC as the inputs to this screen.  See Figure 4.9, page 85.  The program will then generate the Degree Wheel Readings points shown in Figure 4.19. 
Record Cam Lift data for the exhaust lobe as done with the intake.  This exhaust lobe has very gentle opening and closing ramps and therefore has several points (97 to be exact) with greater than .002" Cam Lift.  Again, you may want to delete all points after Point #97 by clicking on Point 98 in the Point Column, and clicking on Delete Remaining Rows in the Edit menu. 
You should now graph and report the Exhaust data so the Cam Analyzer can do its checks.  As with the Intake, all the data looks good. Again you should save your measurements by clicking on File, then Save at the Main Screen. 
Conclusions: 
1. 
The New Test command is used to prepare the Cam Analyzer for entering Cam Lift data from a new cam.  The program directs you through a series of  steps, so details are not overlooked. 

2. 
The Find TDC command directs you through steps to accurately index your degree wheel to the engine. 

3. 
The Generate Degree Wheel Readings command will fill the Degree Wheel Readings column with appropriate readings based on the first Degree Wheel Readings reading you enter. 

4. 
Cam Lift data can easily be entered by taking advantage of the EZ Data Entry screen.  This feature will save time and prevent mistakes. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
5. 
You can click on Graph to produce a high resolution graph so you can check the cam profile you have measured.  Any mistakes in the Cam Lift data you entered are immediately obvious.  This lets you check and correct readings which look “out of line" while you are still set up on the engine. 

6. 
Once a lobe is completed, you can check your data with Graphs and Reports.  Graphs let you check for "bumps" in the data which can indicate an error in data entry.  Reports give lobe centerline and .050" events.  If these events do not match the 

cam grinder's specs, you should double check your data. 

7. 
The Cam Analyzer's "filtering" or "smoothing" routines check for points which "are not smooth".  You should double check these points and those around these points to be sure you entered the Cam Lift data correctly. 


Figure 4.19 Starting the Exhaust Lobe 
Click here to 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.2 Analyzing and Comparing Cams 
This example will  work with a Solid Roller Circle Track cam, the UD6060S.R07 found in the EXAMPLES folder.  To open this file, click on File, then Open (from all saved tests) at the Main Screen.  Choose the EXAMPLES folder, click on UD6060S.R07, then click on Open to open this file.  See Figure 4.20. 

Most all of the Cam Analyzer's features allow you to compare one cam to another.  For example, you can print a Duration Report for 2 cams and compare the results.  Click on Report at the top of the Main Screen for the Report Menu of Figure 4.21 and select Duration Report as the Type.  Figure 4.22 shows 2 Duration reports, one for the UD6060S.R07, and another for the XDRAG.PTI cam. 
Another useful feature is to compare 2 or more cams graphically on the Graph screen. For example, let's compare the intake lobe of the UD6060S.R07 to the XDRAG.PTI  (same as CC8094S.R04) cam from Example 4.1.   
Click on Graph at the top of the Main Screen and select Intake Cam Data as the Graph Type.  See Figure 4.23.   Set only Graph Lift to Yes so you will only graph Cam Lift.  Set Lift Filtering to Some (since this profile was also measured by hand) and Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering to None.  Then click on Make Graph to produce the graph of Figure 4.24. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.22 Duration Reports 
Cam Summaries at 


Specification  Circle Track Int  Circle Track Exh  Drag Int  Drag Exh  
Duration at .050”  258.9  260.4  280.8  293.0  
Duration at .200”  182.1  183.4  193.6  196.8  
Lobe Area  37.60  37.74  42.23  40.89  
Lobe Lift  .436  .434  .469  .423  
Lobe Sep/Overlap  107.1  47.1  104.6  77.8  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Click on Add Test 
Figure 4.24 Cam Lift GraphFigure 4.23 Graph Menu
at the top of the Graph screen, 

Click on Add Test to add a test 
shown in Figure 
4.24. This opens up the Open screen very similar to that shown in Figure 
4.20 where you can select the XDRAG.PTI cam.  Click on XDRAG.PTI to highlight it, then click on Open to select it for graphing.  You will be returned to the graph screen, now with 2 intake lobes. 
Legend for 2 files shown here, showing which color is for which file and data type. 
Clicking on History Log (or History Log button) opens up History Log for graphing more than 1 

Background:  Actually, what the Add Test is doing is adding this test to the top of the History Log, and placing a Yes in the ‘Graph?’ column.  If XDRAG.PTI was already in the History Log because you had recently worked with it, you could have just clicked on History Log and placed a Yes in the ‘Graph?’ column to graph it. 
This graph shows that the XDRAG.PTI cam has higher lift and more lobe area.  It also shows XDRAG.PTI opens somewhat earlier and closes much later. 
Figure 4.25 Graph Comparing 2 Intake Lobes 

cam. 
Figure 4.26 History Log Which Determines Which Files are Graphed 
Click in this column to add a Yes (or click on a Yes to remove it) to state which of these files you want graphed. 
The program uses this Std Graph Title to label this cam in the graph. You can click on this title to change it to most anything you want of 16 characters or less. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.27 Shifting Graphs With Respect To Each Other 

Click on one of these 
buttons to start the 
Shifting process. It 
starts by shifting the top 
file (ultradyne cam #) 1 
degree. Then click on 
the other button to 
return the UD6060 file 
back to 0 adv. 
Click on the 2nd file (compcam cam #) to select this cam for shifting. 
Click on this button to shift the 2nd file (comp­cam cam #) to the left (advance it) until the lift at .050” looks about the same. 
When curves match at about .050” cam lift, the CompCam Drag Racing cam has been advanced about 14 deg. 
Let's say we want to see what the profiles would look like if both had approximately the same intake closing @ .050" events.  See Figure 4.27 for the steps to accomplish this.  As Figure 4.27 shows, you would have to advance the drag racing cam 14 degrees to obtain approximately the same intake closing events at .050” lift.  Figure 4.28 shows how you could “zoom in” on just the closing ramp to see it in more detail. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.29 Comparing Acceleration Graphs, Filtering Set to “None” Select 1 (no factor) for Scaling since only acceleration
Select No for Lift and data will be graphed.
Yes for Acceleration Select Some for Lift Filtering (because these files were measured by hand) and None for Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering 
Note ‘jumpy’ acceleration graphs at opening and closing ramps. 

Another useful comparison between cams is to compare acceleration curves.  Figure 4.29 shows how you could compare only the intake acceleration curves. Figure 4.29 shows a very “jumpy” acceleration graph.  To get rid of some of the “jumpiness” in the acceleration graphs, click on Graph Type at the top of the graph screen, and select Moderate for the Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering level. Figure 4.30 shows the same acceleration graphs but with Filtering set to Moderate.   
To determine the exact acceleration rates at certain points, we will use the "cursor" feature.  Click on one of the acceleration graphs to display the vertical line cursor, or click on one of the cursor buttons.  The exact acceleration values at the cursor appears in the graph legend on the right side of the graph.  Figure 4.30 shows the cursor at the maximum positive acceleration point on the opening ramp.  For the on UltraDyne circle track cam it is .00032 and for the Comp Cam drag racing cam it is .00028. This tells you that the maximum positive acceleration is approximately .33 thousandths inch per cam degree per cam degree and occurs at 330 crank degrees (30 degrees BTDC).  Table 4.3 shows some other maximum acceleration points for both cam profiles. 
Table 4.3 Maximum Cam Accelerations 

Cam  Max + Opening  Max - Max + Closing  
Circle Track UltraDyne  .32  -.27  .34  
Drag Racing CompCam  .28  -.27  .28  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.30 Using Cursor to Find Exact Acceleration Values, Filtering set to “Moderate” 

Table 4.3 shows that the Circle Track cam has slightly higher acceleration rates on the opening and closing ramps than the Drag Racing cam.  These differences in acceleration rates can mean: 
• 
The Drag Racing cam was designed for a higher RPM range than the Circle Track cam. The Circle Track's higher acceleration rates can only be tolerated at lower RPM. 

• 
At the same engine RPM with equal weight valve train components, the Circle Track cam would be harder on valve train components.  That is primarily due to its higher + acceleration rates on the opening and closing ramps. 

• 
At the same engine RPM with equal weight valve train components, the Circle Track and Drag Racing cam would require approximately the same spring rates. That is primarily due to both cams having approximately the same acceleration rates over the nose of the cam.  In general, the higher the - acceleration rate, the more spring pressure required to keep the tappet in contact with the cam, especially over the nose of the cam. 


Conclusions: 
• 
Measured cam profiles can be compared 2 ways: 

• 
Comparing calculated specs like duration at various lifts, Lobe Area, etc. calculated from the various reports. 

• 
Making graphs where lift, velocity or acceleration from 2 or more different cams can be graphically compared on one graph. 

• 
Several graph options like zooming, shifting,  graphing more than 1 file, cursor feature, etc. make it easy to manipulate the graphs and pin-point certain areas of a graph. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
Accuracy: 
The accuracy of the Cam Analyzer's cam measurements like Lobe Area, Int Opening at .050”, Duration @ .200” depend on: 
1.
 Accurately finding TDC and setting the degree wheel to TDC

 2.
 Accurately setting the crank and cam to the Degree Wheel Readings points. 

 3.
 Accurately recording tappet Cam Lift. 

4.
 The number of data points you record.  The more points (the lower the Deg Steps), the more accurate the results. 


The following "Tips for Accurate Measurements"  will help you with the first three requirements.  The section Effect of Deg Steps discusses the fourth point. 
Tips for Accurate Measurements 
1. Double check your measurements 
When finding TDC and you have found the 2 degree wheel points, one on each side of TDC, rotate the crank to these readings again and see if they repeat. 
If you have just set the degree wheel and pointer to read TDC, check that this agrees with your previous TDC or spark timing marks.  For example, when your degree wheel and pointer are set to TDC, do the timing marks on the damper also read TDC.  (You may have to remove the degree wheel and install the damper temporarily to check this.)  If they agree, then the original marks and your degree wheel and pointer setting are most likely both correct.  If they do not agree, repeat the procedure for finding TDC. 
When you just finished recording the last Cam Lift point on the closing ramp, continue rotating the crank/cam to the opening ramp.  Check that your first couple of Cam Lift readings on the opening ramp still agree with Cam Lift readings you recorded. 
2. Always rotate the crank in the correct direction 
There is considerable "slop" in most cam drive systems.  For this reason, you must always keep rotating the crank in the same direction when setting Degree Wheel Readings points.  If you go past a certain Degree Wheel Readings point you must back up the cam and crank at least 30 crank degrees, then approach the Degree Wheel Readings point again. 
3. The lifter stays in contact with the cam for all Cam Lift measurements. 
Before each Cam Lift measurement, apply slight pressure to the lifter to ensure it is touching the cam profile. 
4. Use the correct lifter. 
Always use the lifter designed for the cam being measured.  Flat tappets on roller cams or vice versa, or the wrong roller tappet roller diameter will give very different Cam Lift measurements for exactly the same cam profile. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
5. Securely attach the dial indicator. 
The easier it is to set up your dial indicator, the more accurate your measurements.  If you have to "hold your breath" for each Cam Lift measurement hoping the dial indicator does not shift, your measurements will not be accurate.  Take some time to make a dial indicator extension, or purchase a special tool from your cam grinder so the dial indicator accurately reads tappet Cam Lift.  Make a stand which bolts to the engine where the dial indicator base can set securely.  Be sure the dial indicator probe is parallel to the lifter bore. 
Effect of # Deg Steps and Comparison With Computerized Cam Checking Systems 
Graphs shown in this section are from the DOS version 1.1, but results are the same with Windows Version 2.0. The Windows version does not allow some of the Deg Steps allowed by the DOS version shown here (like 6, 8 or 16 degrees) but the  trends are the same in the Windows version for the Deg Steps possible in the  Windows version. 
The Cam Analyzer does not assume each Degree Wheel Reading and Cam Lift data point is exactly accurate.  It assumes you could be off slightly for each reading. The more points you record and the smaller the Deg Steps, the less important are these minor errors, and the more likely the filtered or smoothed cam profile is accurate. 
In addition, the rate at which the filtered cam profile can "bend" also depends on the Deg Steps. For example, the Cam Analyzer may require 5 points to allow the cam profile change from being flat to rising straight up at a 90 degree angle.  If Deg Steps is 10, it would take 50 degrees to let this cam profile change occur. However, at Deg Steps = 4, it would take only 20 degrees.   
See Figure A1 for an illustration.  It shows with Deg Steps = 6, the filtered cam profile is very close to the "true profile", but with Deg Steps = 20 there is a big difference the filtered and the "true profile". 
Figure A1 Example of Small “Deg Step” Allowing the Filtered Profile to More Closely Match Rapidly Changing Cam Profile 
True Profile NUMDEG-6 NUMDEG-20 Deg Steps = 6 Deg Steps = 20 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
To summarize, using smaller Deg Steps increments help in 2 ways: 
1. 
With more Cam Lift measurements, each single measurement is not as critical, so small measurement errors are not as critical. 

2. 
The filtered cam profile can change direction over a smaller span of crank degrees and more accurately follow the measured cam profile. 


The advantages of a smaller Deg Steps can be best explained with an example.  Figure A2 and A3 show comparison graphs of the same intake cam profile's lift and acceleration graph.  For each successive graph, the Deg Steps was doubled (only half as many readings were taken).  For the titles SG-P30-4, SG-P30-8, SG-P30-16, the Deg Steps were 4, 8,16 respectively.  Calculated results for each profile are listed in Table A.1 
For all graphs and calculations, the REPORT & GRAPH OPTIONS of FILTER Cam Lift CURVE and FILTER VEL/ACCL were set to Y and 2 as recommended for most situations.  Also, VEL was eliminated from the graphs by setting VEL SCALE FACTOR to 0.  (These were specs used in the older DOS program.)  For comparison, results and graphs were made from Cam Dr measurements.  The Cam Analyzer results were based on these Cam Dr measurements, but only to the nearest .001 inch.  Figure A4 shows graphs from the Cam Dr's software and Figure A5 shows graphs from Cam Pro's calculations using the Cam Dr data. 
Table A1 Cam Analyzer Analysis versus Computerized Methods 
Cam Analysis  Dur @ .050”  Lobe Area  Max Lift  Opening Ramp Pk Accel  Nose Pk Accel  Closing Ramp Pk Accel  
Cam Analyzer, 4 Deg Steps  288.0  43.83  .477  .264  -.261  .260  
Cam Analyzer, 8 Deg Steps  289.9  43.83  .476  .250  -.257  .250  
Cam Analyzer, 16 Deg Steps  295.9  43.78  .469  .225  -.250  .227  
Cam Dr with Cam Dr measurements  287.5  43.85  .478  .262  -.260  .267  
Cam Pro with Cam Dr measurements  287.0  43.85  .477  .266  -.263  .268  

Note: The Cam Dr and Cam Pro both analyzed the same cam measurements, made with the Cam Dr measurement system. Cam Dr is a trademark of Quadrant Scientific Inc. Cam Pro is a trademark of Audie Technology. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A2  Intake Cam Lift & Acceleration for Deg Steps = 4  
Figure A3  Intake Cam Lift & Acceleration for Deg Steps = 8  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

As Table A1 shows, the Cam Analyzer results compare very closely with the computerize methods when Deg Steps = 4, and fairly well when Deg Steps = 8.  When Deg Steps = 16 the error is too high.  For example the true duration @ .050" lift appears to be 287-288 degrees.  With Deg Steps = 16 the Cam Analyzer measures 296, an 8-9 degree error. 
As shown in Example 4.2, acceleration is an important cam profile characteristic.  Table A1 shows the Cam Analyzer's accelerations agree well with the computerized systems when Deg Steps = 4.  As the Deg Steps increase, the difference between the computerized systems and the Cam Analyzer increase.  For example, when Deg Steps = 16, acceleration on the opening ramp is .225, over 15% less than the true value of approximately .265. 
With Deg Steps = 4, the Cam Analyzer's acceleration graph also matches the computerizes systems quite well.  Note the "bumps" in the negative acceleration curve are the same with the Cam Dr, Cam Pro and Cam Analyzer (Deg Steps = 4) graphs.   
Conclusions: 
• 
From these examples, it is obvious that you must keep the Deg Steps low for optimum accuracy. 

• 
With care taking measurements and using a low Deg Steps (2, 4 or 5), the Cam Analyzer can give nearly the same results as computerized systems. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Appendix 2 Backing Up Data 
Check Appendix 5 for several recently added Backup and Restore features. 
Backing up data means to make more than one copy of the data which can be used or referred to at a later date.  This may be needed in the event one copy becomes lost or erased, or you need room in the Cam Library.  Backing up data can take 2 basic forms: 
 Paper Reports Copying files with Windows copy commands 
Other than making Paper Reports, backing up data requires knowledge of Windows File Manager (3.1) or Windows Explorer (95, 98, NT) commands.  Unless you are experienced with Windows commands, have someone experienced with Windows assist you to prevent losing data. 
Paper Reports: 
If you already keep written copies of all cam measurements you perform, you already understand this form of backing up data.  When you finish a cam, simply print out an Int & Exh Raw Data Report.  In the Print options menu, be sure to check Include Test Setup.  This paper Report contains nearly all the data you need to reproduce this cam in the future.  Simply store this paper Report in a safe place. 
Disadvantage of Paper Back Ups: 
For example, say you have accidentally erased a Cam File but have a paper Report of that data.  If you now want to recalculate that data, correct the data to a new Test Pressure, compare new data to this old data, etc, you must re-enter all that RAW data by hand as if you were running a cam test. 
Copying data to disk with Windows commands: 
This method is the preferred method.  If you are not familiar with Windows commands, have someone help you the first couple of times.  However, this is the most reliable and most efficient way to back up your data.  Note:  Unless stated otherwise, all mouse clicks are with the normal, left button on the mouse. 
To copy Entire CAMDATA Folder using Windows 95, 98 or NT, which contains all folders and cam files in the Test Library: Click on Start, then Programs, then Windows Explorer (usually at the bottom of the list of programs).  You will obtain the Windows Explorer screen shown in Figure A5. 
Locate the PERFTRNS.PTI folder (may not be printed in capital letters) on the left side of the Windows Explorer screen, usually on the C drive.  Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the PERFTRNS.PTI folder. 
You should now see the CA20 folder. Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the CA20 folder. You should now see the CAMDATA folder. Right click on the yellow CAMDATA folder icon to display the menu of options.  Click on the Copy command to copy this entire folder (all cam files in the standard Test File Library). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A5 Copying Files with Windows 95, 98 or NT Windows Explorer 


Drag slide bar to the top of the list to find your Floppy disk drive (usually A) Right click on the Floppy drive icon. 

Then click on Paste to paste whatever you copied (in this example, the entire CAMDATA folder) to the disk in the Floppy drive. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Now you must tell the computer where you want to copy the files to.  Click and drag the slide bar for the left section of the Windows Explorer screen to the top.  (You can also click on the up or down arrow buttons on the slide bar.)  Look for the Floppy Drive icon, usually the “A” drive.  Put a new, formatted disk in the floppy drive.  Then right click on the Floppy Drive icon, and select Paste from the list of options.  You will see the floppy drive light come on as the entire CAMDATA folder and all its contents are copied to the floppy disk.  Label this disk with something like “CAMDATA folder, xx/xx/xx” with a name and date. 
Notes: 
If you have many cams in the Test Library, they may not all fit onto 1 floppy disk.  Windows Explorer will tell you this and ask you to insert another new, formatted disk.  If this happens, be sure to label all disks with a name, date and sequential #s, and keep the entire disk set together. A suggestion for novice computer users is to make each folder under CAMDATA a separate floppy disk. This may require more floppy disks, but will make it easier to understand restoring just certain folders in the future. 
You may just want to back up one particular folder in the cam library (in the CAMDATA folder) or just 1 particular cam.  You would do this the same as with copying the entire CAMDATA folder, just click on the [+] by the CAMDATA folder to display the folders under CAMDATA.  Then right click on the folder you want to Copy.  To find individual cam files, click on the yellow folder icon containing the cam file and the contents of the folder will be shown on the right side of the Windows Explorer screen.  Then right click on the cam file name and select Copy. 
You can also copy individual cam files to the floppy drive inside the Cam Analyzer program.  Open the file you want to copy so it is the current cam file.  Then click on File at the top of the Main Screen, then select Copy to Floppy Disk. 
More experienced computer users may want to use the “Backup” features built into Windows 95 and 98 (click on Start, Programs, Accessories, System Tools, Backup).  This compresses cam files so it takes fewer floppy disks.  However you need to use the Backup program to restore cam files, which can be more confusing to novice computer users. 
Restoring Data 
Be very careful when restoring data, as you may overwrite Test Files with old, erroneous information. Read all the information below before restoring data.  If you are not familiar with Windows Explorer, have someone more experienced help you. 
The ONLY reason to restore data is if you have lost cam files. This could be because you mistakenly erased them,  you had a major computer failure, or you are moving the program to another computer. Do NOT restore data unless you have one of these problems, as you could possibly create many more problems than you are trying to fix. 
When restoring cam files and folders, you pretty much reverse the procedure for backing up.  First you  put your backed up floppy disk in the floppy drive.  Then open Windows Explorer, find the Floppy drive icon and click on it to display its contents.  Right click on the folder you want to restore and select Copy. 
Now find the CAMDATA folder under CA20 under PERFTRNS.PTI, usually on the C: drive.  Right click on the folder 
1 level up from the folder you are restoring.  For example, if you are restoring the cam file folder CHEV which was in the CAMDATA folder, you must click on the CAMDATA folder. If you are restoring the entire Test Library folder CAMDATA, you must click on the CA20 folder. If you are restoring the cam file 194-150 which was in the CHEV folder under the CAMDATA folder, you must click on the CHEV folder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
During the restoring (copying) process, Windows Explorer checks to see if it is overwriting an existing file (Figure A6).  If it is, it will ask you if the existing file or folder should be overwritten.  Be very careful when overwriting files, as you may overwrite a new cam file with data from an old cam file of the same name.   
Before restoring cam files, it is good practice to back up all cam files first.  Then if you make a mistake, and overwrite cam files you didn’t mean to, you have your backup copies to restore the cam files from. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 3 New Features in Version 3.2 
Several new features are included in v3.2, including: 
• 
Full 32 bit version, which is much more compatible with newer printers, printer drivers and operating systems, like XP, 2000, NT4 etc. 

• 
Full 32 bit version lets you use much longer, more flexible file names for saving your files. 

• 
Click on “File”, then “Open from all saved tests” and you have many more features for saving, copying, deleting and renaming folders, which are sets of cam test files. 

• 
You can now write (export) files in Comp Cam’s ™ format.  This lets you create individual file lobes of intake and exhaust lobes so you can mix lobes from different cam files. 

• 
User manual is now access bile from within the program by clicking on Help at top of the Main Screen, then Display User’s Manual. The program uses Adobe Acrobat ™ to display it in PDF format. 

• 
The graph screen now enlarges to fill the entire computer screen. 

• 
You can now select the amount of smoothing the program should do to manually entered cam lift data.  For example, data entered at more than every 5 degrees should probably have less than the Std smoothing. 

• 
You can now select to manually enter the degree increments in most any step size you want.  This allows you to concentrate the readings in only the area you want (like around .050 lift and peak lift).  This is done by selecting User Entered for Degree Steps in Test Setup. 

• 
Program now tries to automatically recognize if a file was recorded with millimeters or inches lift.  It then converts it as necessary for the current Preference setting of either millimeters or inches lift. 

• 
Several edit options added at 


Figure 1 Folder Options from Open (from all saved tests) Screen
top of main screen. 
• 
Preference added for using either millimeters or inches for lift inputs. 

• 
Added option to Copy To or Paste From the Clipboard the Lift Data Column.  Click on Top Row in Lift Column "Tappet Lift" to see this option. 

• 
Added options to read different lobes in Cam Pro Plus files.  It previously defaulted to just the first lobe, typically Cylinder #1. 

• 
Added Edit Command to Copy or Swap Lobes option under File command. 



Some of these features will be illustrated below. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices Figure 2 Exporting Cam Files in Comp Cams ™ File Format 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Figure 4 Two Important New Test Options 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Tips on Smoothing 
• 
No Smoothing draws straight lines directly through each data point.  Even if each data point you record is exactly correct, this method of estimating the cam profile between points is not very accurate, because the cam profile is a curve, not segments of straight lines.   

• 
Standard smoothing draws curves which are not easily bent through the points.  This was the smoothing done to all cam profiles in version 2.0. Since the curves are not easily bent, it may not draw the cam profile exactly through each point you record. This can actually be more accurate because it is impossible to exactly measure each point.  This method can also “flag out” errors in data entry when hand recorded points do not lie on smooth curves.  However, if you are using large degree wheel increments for making measurements (something larger than 6 degrees), this method may be too “stiff” to bend accurately through the points you have recorded. 

• 
Less than Standard Smoothing draws curves between points, but bends more easily than Standard Smoothing.  This is the amount of smoothing recommended if you are using large degree wheel increments, something greater than 6 degrees. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 4: New Features for Cam Test Stand (v3.2 B) 
Check Appendices 5 through 8 for several recently added features. 
Several new features are included in v3.2 B.  Most all these features involve using the electronics, encoders and test stand to measure camshafts quickly and accurately.  Figure A4.1 shows the cam test stand and critical components. 

The first part of this supplement will be arranged as a series of steps to get your software and hardware setup so you can start measuring cams and analyzing the results.  At the end of this supplement there will be sections discussing more new features. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
A4.1 Setting Up and Running A Test 
1 Set Up Black Box II 
Make the connections as shown in Figure A4.2.  You will need a USB-COM (serial) adapter if your computer does not have a true COM (serial) port. 

2 Set Up Software 
It is easiest to start by opening up an example test which was done with the Cam Test Stand.  This is shown in Figure 3.  Click on File, then Open from All Saved Tests at the upper left corner of the main screen.  Click on the SB Ford on Stand or SB Chevy on Stand from the Examples folder, then click on Open to open that test file.  Back at the main screen you will see all 16 lobes with tabs across the top for each one in cylinder numbering order.  At the bottom of the main screen you will see the lobes drawn out as they are arranged on the camshaft itself, including bearings, distributor gear (if any), etc.   
You can click on the tabs at the top, or the numbers on the lobes on the bottom to move to that particular lobe.  Then its data is listed in the spreadsheet in the lower left corner and its graph is shown on the graph section in color.  If you have selected the appropriate preference, lobes for all other cylinders are also shown for comparison to let you spot lobes which are different from the rest. See Section A4.4 New Preferences. 
You must tell the software what type of rotary encoder you are using.  See Figure A4.4  This is done by clicking on Settings at the top of the main screen, then Tester Calibration, then typing in 2500 for Rotary Sensor Pulses/Rev.  (Old Cam Dr encoders are 3600.) You can also set the Com Port you will use to connect to the Black Box, typically Com 1 on older computers.  If you are not sure which com ports are available on your computer, click on the Find button and let the program try all com ports to see if it can find the Black Box. Be sure the Black Box is powered up (green LED lit) and the serial cable is connected correctly when doing this.  This “Finding” process may take 30-60 seconds. 
When you have set these items, click on Back at the top of the Cam Tester Specs screen, then choose to save these changes when asked by the program.  These will then be saved as the “Master” Cam Tester Specs, which the program assumes is the encoder you are using right now.  If you would open a previously done test, you may see different Cam Tester Specs.  That is because those items were used for that test, which may not be the same as for the Cam Test Stand you are running right now.  
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



3 Starting a New Test 
To start a new test, click on ‘File’, then ‘New (start new test)’ at the upper left corner of the main screen.  See Figure A4.5. 
Figure A4.5 Starting a New Test 

1) Click on ‘File’, then ‘New (start new test)’ to open this Starting a New Test  
2) Be sure to check this box for “Using Electronics” to display the ‘Specs for Electronics’ section shown here.  



3) Set these ‘Specs for Electronics’ for your cam to be tested. These are explained in this section of text.  
4) If you are not sure of what to set the ‘TDC Method’ to, choose Intake Centerline and set the Cam Timing Value to something typical, like 110 deg.  
5) Hopefully your Cam Design will already be available. If not, you will have to set up several specs in the Test Setup menu. Click on See Specs button to do this. These specs are covered in Section A4.2.  

Specs for Electronics 
Cam Design TDC Method Cam Timing Value Number of Cyls to Test 
The section ‘Specs for Electronics’ in the Starting a New Test screen contains critical items the software needs to know how your cam lobes are arranged on the camshaft.  These critical items are covered in the upcoming Section A4.2. 
For other inputs in this screen, check Section 2.6 in this manual.  To Display this User’s Manual when running the program, you can click on Help, then Display User’s Manual at the top of the main screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
When you have entered all the info and changes for this screen, click on ‘Start New Test’ at the upper left of this screen.  You will be returned to the main screen with all lobes blanked out. 
4) Running a Test 
Figure A4.6 outlines the major steps to run a cam test.  These steps will be discussed in more detail in the text of this section. 

1) You must start the test on #1 Cylinder Intake, which may not be the first lobe on the cam layout.  Click on the first blue tab at the top of screen or on the “I1” (for Intake #1) on the blue (intake) cam lobe in the layout drawing at the bottom of the screen.   
2) Click on Record or press F5 to bring up the ‘live display readings’ screen shown above.  When you first start talking to the Black Box, both encoders are zeroed out.  This does not mean the measurement is zero.  The true zero degrees will be determined after the #1 Intake lobe is measured, based on the timing method you have selected in the Starting a New Test screen. Zero lift is redetermined for each lobe based on the lowest reading read for that lobe (typically on the base circle). 
If you get a message that the Black Box is not communicating, check some of the troubleshooting tips at the end of this document. 
3) Place the lifter and linear encoder on the #1 Intake lobe on its base circle.  See Figure A4.7. This is the part of the cam lobe on the opposite side from the ‘nose’ or peak.  Click on Record or press F1 to start recording and turn the cam in its normal direction until the program beeps at you (about 400+ degrees).  Turn the cam relatively slowly and smoothly. It should take at 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
least 10 seconds to rotate the cam.  It is most critical to rotate the cam slowly when on the actual lobe.  When on base circle, you can rotate the cam more quickly.   
If you turn the cam in the wrong direction, it will beep at you.  If this happens and you believe you are turning it in the correct direction, check that the Rotary Encoder is pictured on the correct end of the cam in the Cam Layout drawing.  If that is correct, then you must have the Rotation Direction wrong in the Cam Layout specs, discussed in Section A4.2.3. 
4) Press F9 to advance to the next lobe on the camshaft.  This can be automatic if you have the correct Preferences settings. If you have turned other Preferences on, the program will make some checks to see that the lobe measurements appear accurate.  Some of these checks have to do with turning the cam too fast.  Others have to do with whether these results look the same as 
what was measured on #1 cylinder.  Since this is #1 cylinder, this particular check is not done. If you are mostly interested in a quick check, these checks are not that important.  If you want accurate acceleration and jerk details, you should use these checks to ‘flag out’ lobe measurements which could have errors.  See Section A4.3 on New Preferences. 
Loosen the Cam Follower Bracket, lift the follower up into its adapter, and slide the lifter and bracket to the next lobe as identified in the Cam Layout drawing by the highlighted lobe (brighter color than the rest).  Lower the follower to the cam lobe and tighten the bracket.  Then rotate the cam until the lifter is again on base circle (see Figure A4.7) and press F1 to start recording.  Then rotate the cam slowly and smoothly until it beeps at you. The program will make it’s checks and then you or the program will advance it to the next lobe.  Just keep repeating this pattern until all lobes are measured that you wanted to measure. 
Tips: 
The lifter must slide smoothly in the lifter bore adapter and the cam bearings must slide 

smoothly on the V blocks.  Cozmoline (an ‘anti-rust’ coating) from new cams will be on the bearings and can get on the lifter itself and cause sticky, jerky (inaccurate) measurements.  For quick checks of duration and lift this is OK if you are careful. 
Be sure the pointed tip of the rotary encoder assembly is fully inserted into the pilot of the cam.  If this is not done, you will see that the ring magnet will not be concentric on the cam’s end bearing, and the encoder will ‘orbit’ as you turn the cam. 
Be sure the linear encoder’s tip is on a flat section of the lifter and not near the oil hole for the pushrod.   
The slower you turn the cam, generally the more accurate the readings.  You especially want to turn the cam slowly on the opening and closing ramps, where lift changes rapidly.  We’ve measured lobes rotating them in anywhere from 5 seconds up to 30 seconds per lobe. Stopping the rotation to reposition your hand has generally not been a problem. 
When you turn the cam, turn on a gear or bearing well away from the lobe being measured and close to one of the V block supports on the Cam Test Stand.  This helps ensure you are not loading and bending the camshaft.  Also, try to only put a torque (twist) on the cam, and no side or up/down loading. 
Route the linear encoder’s cable away from the camshaft.  Route the rotary encoder’s cable in the same direction as the Support Rod which sets on the magnet. 
Avoid having the camshaft move longitudinally (along its length) because the Rotary Encoder Support Rod may change its rotary position slightly on the magnet which keeps the 

rotary encoder indexed correctly. 
If you must restart measuring a cam you have already measured lobes on, you must first remeasure #1 Intake.  This gets the rotary encoder and Black Box electronics indexed correctly.  Then you can go directly to the next lobe in the sequence.  (Note 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
that it is most accurate if you do not have to do this, but the amount of error introduced by this method is typically less than 0.2 degrees.) 
5 Analyzing Data: 
There are several new types of graph and report options that the v3.2 B provides.  These are available by clicking on either Graph or Report at the top of the main screen as shown in Figure A4.9. 
One of the most useful new reports is the Int & Exh Compare Specs, which lets you compare all lobes on the cam you tested.  You can quickly see which lobes are significantly different than the others.  Figure A4.9 shows you how you request the report on all Intake and Exhaust lobes.  Figure A4.10 shows the resulting report. 

Another new report type is Compare Measurement Comments.  As discussed earlier, the program makes checks of the measurement data for each lobe measured.  The results of these checks are saved so that you can check them if you want.  See Figure A4.11. These checks include: 
Max Gaps:  You would have to turn the cam extremely slowly for the computer to get a measurement at each cam degree of rotation. Therefore, the program uses sophisticated math to fill in gaps in your measurements.  If the gap to be 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
filled is too great, the results may have some errors.  The Max Gaps comments display the largest gap in crankshaft degrees and largest gap in lift. These checks are only made for the actual lobe, and not on base circle, where measurements are not that critical.  For example, if you see something unusual in a lobe, you can check these comments to see if there may be a reason for the unusual results and my decide to measure the lobe again. 
Max Error:  In the process of filling in the gaps, the program estimates the amount of average error estimating lobe lift for each gap. Although these errors look small, it must be remembered that the actual error could be much greater than the average error. Also, even small errors in lift can produce very large errors in acceleration and jerk calculations. 
High Accels:  The program checks each lobe to see if there are unusual looking “breaks” in the lift curve, like a sharp bump or dip.  With a follower on the cam (not a small pointer), it is impossible for these to be seen even if they were there. Therefore, it can be assumed these are measurement errors.  If these “breaks” are found, the words “High Accels” are added to the Measurement Comments. 
Figure A4.9 also shows a new option for graphs and reports, in the Cylinders to Report section at the bottom of their screens. In this section, you see ‘Cyls to Report’, which can be set to All, or Cyl 1 Only, or Pick.  If you choose Pick, then the “Picked Cyls” entry box becomes enabled.  There you can type in a list of cylinder numbers, separated by commas for the cylinders you want included in the report.  For example, you could enter: 
1, 4, 5 
And the program would then do the report on only cylinders 1, 4 and 5.  This can be most useful for graphs, where space in the legend limits the number of graphs you can include on one graph.  Figure A4.12 shows picking 3 cylinders for the current test for graphing.  
Figure A4.10 Int & Exh Compare Specs Report from Screen in Figure 9 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices (C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

You can also specify which cylinders to include in a graph in the History Log.  Figure A4.13 shows how you can pick different lobes from different cam test files for comparison graphs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
A4.2 New Test/Cam Setup Specs 
If you had clicked on the See Specs for Test Setup specs in the Starting a New Test screen, you would be shown the screen in Figure A4.14.  This screen is also available by clicking on Test/Cam Setup at the top of the Main Screen.  In this screen are several important items concerning how the lobes are laid out on the camshaft, and how you want the cam data indexed to TDC. 
When using the Cam Test Stand without the cam in the engine, there is no way to measure how the cam will be timed in the engine.  It can only measure how the lobes are timed with respect to each other.  When you select the TDC Method and Cam Timing 
Value, the program predicts all the cam timing values assuming you install the cam as the TDC Method and Cam Timing Value indicates. 

Type of Cam Data 
 When you choose ‘Using Electronics’ in the Starting a New Test screen, this spec is set to Measured with Electronics.  You can also choose this in this screen after starting a test, but the program may not perform as expected.  That is because this items is so critical to how the entire test is done.  If this items is not set correctly, it is best to start a new test and be sure to choose ‘Using Electronics’ when you start the new test. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Lifter (profile) Type 
The program uses your choice here only to know if the cam uses Hydraulic (no lash) or Solid (with lash) followers. 
For Cyl # 
This will identify the cylinder number should you have selected to only measure 1 cylinder in the ‘Electronic Measurement Settings’ section for ‘Number of Cylinders to Test’. 
Rocker Arm Ratio Actual Valve Lash, in 
These items let the program convert the measured lobe lift into valve lift for calculate results in reports and graphs.  If you select one of the Hydraulic Lifter (profile) Types, the Actual Valve Lash inputs will be disabled. 
A4.2.1 Electronics Measurement Settings 
TDC Method Cam Timing Value 
These two items work together to let you identify how this cam is timed in the engine.  If your cam card gives you info on the cam’s timing, you can enter these values directly.  For example, if the cam card says the intake centerline is at 108 degrees, then choose Intake Centerline as the TDC Method and enter 108 as the Cam Timing Value.  If the cam card says you should check the cam’s intake lift at TDC in the engine, and it should be .145” lift, then choose Intake Lift at TDC as the TDC Method and enter .145 as the Cam Timing Value.   
If you do not know how the cam is timed and have no cam card, then the recommended entries are Intake Centerline as the TDC Method and 110 as the Cam Timing Value. 
When you measure a cam, the program will try to exactly put the intake lobe for Cylinder 1 at the exact timing you have specified here.  (The intake lobe on Cylinder 1 is the first lobe which must be measured.)  All other lobes will be timed as measured with respect to #1 Intake.  (Note that the other intake lobes will probably not be exactly the same as #1 due to manufacturing tolerances.) 
Cam Design 
Here you can choose one of the preloaded cam designs provided by Performance Trends, or choose the top choice of Custom.  If you use Custom, then you must click on the Lifter Bore Angle Details and Cam Layout Details buttons and enter all these items for your engine and cam.  These items are discussed later in this section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
# Cyls to Test 
Here you can select to do all cylinders on the cam or just a smaller set.  Typically you will only choose either All or just 1, where this would be for cylinder #1 only. 
A4.2.2 Lifter Bore Angle Details 
Lifter Bore Angle Details are NOT needed if you measure the cam in the engine.  V 3.8 allows you to specify ‘Measured in Engine’ and ignore these details.  Check Appendix 5. 
Most engine builders do not worry about how the lobes are exactly laid out on the camshaft.  But to the cam grinder, these angles are critical to getting each lobe timed exactly correct for each cylinder.  Figure A4.15, diagram A shows lifter bores for a typical V-8 engine with normal clockwise rotation.  All intake and exhaust lifters are at the same angle on the right bank and all are at a different, but equal angle different or the left bank.   
For purposes of the Cam Analyzer, Lifter Bore Angles are measured with respect to #1 Cylinder Intake.  If other lifter bore angles are the same as #1 Cylinder Intake, then you do not have to specify a Lifter Bore Angle for them.  For most all V type engines, all cylinders on the other bank from #1 will have a different Lifter Bore Angle, which must be specified to the program. The left diagram A in Figure A4.15 shows a typical GM or Mopar V-8 engine, with #1 cylinder on the left bank and all lifter bores for the same bank exactly in line with each other.  Diagram B shows one of the more complicated Lifter Bore Angle layouts you are likely to encounter, that for the Big Block Chevy.  This engine has lifters at 4 different angles, 3 different angles with respect to #1 Intake.  All these angles must be specified to the program and the cylinders and whether intake and/or exhaust lobes are involved.  (Luckily, Performance Trends has loaded in several of these details for several engines, including the BB Chevy, and you can just pick a Cam Design and avoid these inputs.) 
If you click on the Lifter Bore Angle Details button, you will be presented with the screens similar to those shown in Figure A4.16.  These items identify the angle between the lifter bores for pushrod type engines. The angles on this screen describe how many cam degrees before #1 Cylinder Intake the other lobes are timed.  These are the same angle that can be read from a blueprint of the engine. 
Number of LBAs (Lifter Bore Angles) Needed 
For most inline, pushrod engines, these inputs are not needed.  You will specify 0 as the Number of LBAs needed and all other inputs are disabled.  For V type engines, you are likely to need at least 1 LBA (like shown in Figure 4.15 diagram A) and possibly up to 3 (as shown in Figure 4.15 B).   
Lifter Bore Angle #1 
This is the number of degrees other cylinders’ lifter bore angle comes before #1 Cylinder Intake’s lifter bore.  For example, in Figure 4.15 diagram A, because of the rotation direction, the right bank comes approximately 90 degrees before #1 cylinder.  DO NOT assume that V engines have a lifter bore angle of 90 degrees or the same angle as the angle between cylinder bores.  Most often they do not.  You must check with the engine builder to know what the lifter bore angles are exactly. 
Notice in Figure A4.16 that for the Small Block Ford (and most Fords) that #1 cylinder is on the right bank and the cylinders on the left bank come after #1 cylinder. For the Ford, the LBA is specified as a negative number because the other bank’s cylinders come after #1 cylinder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Cylinders Using LBA 1 
Here you will enter a string of number separated by minus signs or dashes (-) for each cylinder number which will use this lifter bore angle. 
Int or Exh 
Here you specify if just the Intake lobes,  just the Exhaust lobes, or both the Intake and Exhaust lobes will use this LBA. 
Example for Filling In Specs for Big Block Chevy 
The LBAs for the BB Chevy are 77.5 degrees between intake lifter bores and 90 degrees between exhaust lifter bores.  That means the right bank’s intakes occur 77.5 deg before the #1 intake.  The #1 exhaust (and other exhausts on the left bank) occur (90-77.5) / 2  = 6.25 deg degrees after the #1 Intake (-6.25 deg).  The right bank’s exhausts occur 77.5 deg +6.25 deg before #1 intake.  Using this info you will fill in the Lifter Bore Angle Details screen as shown in Figure A4.16 for the Big Block Chevy.  (As stated earlier, Performance Trends has loaded in several of these details for several engines, including the BB Chevy, and you can just pick a Cam Design and avoid these inputs.) 
Figure A4.15 Lifter Bore Configuration (viewed from front of engine) 
Lifter Bore Angle 
A B 
     #5 Intake
                                           #1 Intake & Exh & Exh 
Right Left Right Left Bank Bank Bank Bank 


Cam Rotation Typical GM like Small Block Chevy Complicated Lobe Angles like Big Block Chevy 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A4.16 Some Typical Lifter Bore Angle Details Screens 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
A4.2.3 Cam Layout Details 
This screen contains other details about the cam in addition to the Lifter Bore Angle details, like firing order, how the lobes are organized on the cam, etc. 
Cam Layout Details have been expanded in v3.8.  Check Appendix 5. 
Number Cylinders on Cam 
Choose the number of cylinders for lobes on this cam. 
Type of Lobes 
Choose whether the cam has both Intake and Exhaust lobes, or just All Intake or All Exhaust lobes like those found in dual OHC engines. 
Number of Intake Lobes 
Choose the number of intake lobes for each cylinder on this cam.  For all 2 valves per cylinder engines, this is 1.  For, 3, 4 or 5 valves per cylinder engines, this could 2 or 3. 
Number of Exhaust Lobes 
Choose the number of exhaust lobes for each cylinder on this cam.  For all 2 valves per cylinder engines, this is 1.  For, 3, 4 or 5 valves per cylinder engines, this could 2 or 3. 
Firing Order 
Here you will enter a string of number separated by minus signs or dashes (-) for the firing order of the engine.  You must start with cylinder #1. 
Offset ('odd') Firing 
Choose ‘Yes’ if you have an odd or uneven firing engine.  The most notable odd fire engines are the Buick ‘Odd Fire’ V-6 and the Harley Davidson V twin. For most engines, you will choose ‘No’. 
Cyls. Offset from #1 
If you chose ‘Yes’ for Offset Fireing above, you will enter a string of number separated by minus signs or dashes (-) for the cylinders which are different from cylinder #1.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Offset Crank Degrees 
Enter the number of degrees which the ‘Cyls, Offset from #1’ fire before they should if the engine was even firing. 
Lobe Description 
Here you will enter a string of numbers and letters separated by minus signs or dashes (-) for each lobe, bearing journal, fuel pump eccentric and distributor gear on the cam.  Possible entries include: 
Ix * where x is a cylinder number. The ‘I’ indicates an intake lobe. Ex * where x is a cylinder number. The ‘e’ indicates an exhaust lobe. J A cam bearing journal (This was “B” in some earlier versions.) G A distributor (or other) gear F A fuel pump eccentric 
* If there are more than 1 intake or exhaust valve per cylinder, include an A, B or C immediately after the cylinder number. For example, I2A is the first (A) Intake (I) lobe for cylinder number 2 (2).  E4C is the third 
(C) Exhaust (E) lobe for cylinder number 4 (4). 
This info is used to draw the Cam Layout on the main screen and to identify the lobes for graphing and making reports.  This input can be tedious to enter, but is critical for identifying which lobes are which. 
Rotation (viewed from front) 
Here you choose whether the cam turns CW or CCW when viewed from the front of the engine.  Most all non-marine engines turn CW. 
Encoder Mounted On 
Here you tell the program if the encoder is mounted on the front or rear of the camshaft.  The encoder is then drawn in this position in the Cam Layout on the Main Screen.  It also lets the program know how the encoder’s readings should be coming into the program if you are turning the cam in the correct location. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
A4.3 New Preferences 
Several new Preferences have been added to let you customize how the program works with the electronics.  See Figure A4.17. 

Auto Advance to Next Lobe 
Select Yes and the program will automatically go (advance) to the next lobe on the camshaft after measuring a lobe.  To which lobe is identified in the next Preference, “Next Lobe Is”. 
Next Lobe Is 
If you selected Yes for Auto Advance above, this setting lets you select if you want the “next lobe” to be either the next lobe down the camshaft (as pictured in the Cam Layout drawing) or the next cylinder number (as identified on the tabs across the top of the main screen).  Most users will select “Cam Lobe Position” on the actual camshaft. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Warn if Turning Cam Too Fast 
After you measure a cam, the program checks if the “gaps” between measurement points are larger than what should be used for good accuracy. If the gap is large, the program will give you a warning message, where you can select to either continue to the next lobe, or redo the lobe just measured.  If you want to be as precise as possible, set this to Yes.  If you just want to quickly check a cam for duration, lobe separation and lift, then set this to No. 
Warn if High Accels Found 
After you measure a cam, the program checks if there a “bumps” or “dips” in the lift data which are not likely to be accurate. If they are found, the program will give you a warning message, where you can select to either continue to the next lobe, or redo the lobe just measured.  If you want to be as precise as possible, set this to Yes.  If you just want to quickly check a cam for duration, lobe separation and lift, then set this to No. 
Use New Method to Find Centerline 
Once we were using electronics to measure the cam lobes, we found that the method we were using to determine centerline was not as accurate or repeatable as it could be.  We were using several points at near peak lift to determine centerline.  Now we go much farther down the opening and closing profile to determine the lobe centerline.  This has proven to be much more repeatable, within .1 degrees or better.  The old method was repeatable within .5 degrees or so, which was sufficient for the hand measurements we used to do.  We recommend setting this to Yes.  No should only be used if you want to repeat results from an older version of Cam Analyzer. 
A4.4 Troubleshooting Communications to Electronics 
If you find that the program can not communicate with the Black Box, you may first want to let the program try to “Find” it as shown in Figure A4.4. If it can not be found, check the Troubleshooting features built into the Cam Analyzer in Figure A4.17. The first test available of “Test Com Port” is a very easy test to pass.  That means if you can not pass it, there is a definite problem with the computer’s Com port, or the cable, or you are doing the test wrong.  If the problem proves to be with the computer (which is usually does), then you must contact your computer repair shop.  You could also switch to a USB to Com port converter if you have a USB port.  (USB-Com port converters are typically not as reliable as a true Com port.)  The “Check Boot Message” is a more thorough test, and checks both the Com port and cable, and some basic functioning of the Black Box. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A4.18 Troubleshooting Options 
Click on Help at top of Main Screen, then Troubleshooting, then pick from these 2 options. 
Follow instructions here and down below to run the ‘paper clip’ test to see if the com port is working at all. 
Insert paper clip or piece of wire from pins 2 and 3. Then pick which port to test and click on the Test Com Port button and see if program says port is working. 
Instructions for running the “Boot Up Message” test, to see if the com port can read data from the Black Box II.  This does not test if the computer can send data or the Black Box can read the data sent to it. 
Typical response if the Boot Up Message can be read correctly. 
Response when it appears that the Black Box can read some very simple commands. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

Appendix 5: New Features in v3.8 
Cam Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.0 for Windows. These include 3.2A (Appendix 3), 3.2B (Appendix 4) and now v3.8 (Appendix 5).  Here is a brief listing of some of the features new since v3.2B was released, including Version 3.8’s new features.   
Cam Analyzer v3.8 actually has 4 different versions now, which include: 
• 
Cam Analyzer Basic 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus 

• 
Cam Analyzer Basic with features to use the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus with features to use the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors 


Prior to this, all versions communicated to the Cam Test Stand, however the Plus version added very little to the user who did not have the Test Stand.  Now the Plus version does add several features for users not using the Cam Test Stand. 
Note that some of these new features apply only to the Plus Version of the software. 
New Features for General Program Operation: 
• 
The program now has an “EZ Start Wizard” to walk beginners through the steps of starting a new test.  (Fig A20)  This feature should greatly aid the user to understand all options which can affect the various tests they can run.  

• 
Added several features for emailing graphs, files and PDF reports (if you have the full Adobe Acrobat ™ or some other software which offers a “PDF” printer option). (Fig A21) 

• 
Click on File at top main screen and you will see new Import and Export options.  The Export command is similar to the old Create Cam Dr or Comp Cams files.  The new v3.8 also includes creating S96 format files, “raw” data files for data from cams “Measured with Electronics”, exporting raw data at 1 crank degree (0.5 cam degree) intervals, and default location for the Engine Analyzer Pro v3.5’s Cam Files.  There are 2 raw data export options, Raw ‘As Measured’ data which is the measured data before any conversions, and Raw Converted data is the profile after any conversions (like virtual follower conversions) have been done.  The Import command has 3 options, mainly explaining how you can open files of several different cam file formats, and one discussed in the paragraph below.  (Fig A22) 

• 
Program will automatically look for old v3.2 files and copy them over to this new v3.8.  You can also do this manually by clicking on File at top main screen, then Import, then Import All Files from a Cam Analyzer Program.  (Fig A22) 

• 
Program now has a 'Website' button in the About screen for jumping to www.performancetrends.com website. 

• 
Program has added some new 'Edit' commands for copying cam data to and from the Cam Analyzer to other analysis programs.   

• 
One is the ability to right click on the top of the data columns in the lower left corner of the main screen, and select to copy the Lift Only or Lift and Degree data to the Windows Clipboard.   

• 
More include to click on Edit at top of main screen, then:  

o 
“Add To/Subtract From” to add or subtract a user defined amount of lift. 

o 
Make Mirror Image 


o Make Centerlines Equal (zero advance See Fig A23. 

• 
The Preferences screen has grown, so we’ve now redone the layout to include tabs for the various groups of Preferences. (Fig A24) 

• 
Now when you switch between Inches and Millimeters for the Lift Increments in Preferences, the program also converts: 

o 
Specified lifts for the standard duration reports is also converted to the new lift units. 

o 
Dimensions in the Cam/Test Setup screen. 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
o Dimensions in the Virtual Follower screen. 
• 
Program now has added Backup and Restore commands under File at the main screen.  (Fig A22)   

• 
The main screen now displays better for screen resolutions greater than 600 x 800.  

• 
The screen colors are now more compatible with Windows XP.  

• 
Now when you click on a graphed point on the main screen, the row for that data point gets highlighted in the table of results. 

• 
Program now better remembers the printer type and printer page orientation when you make changes to the Windows Printer Setup. 

• 
Program now has new preference to let you pick a Company Logo graphics file to appear in your printouts.  The logo prints out in Graph printouts also.  (Fig A24)  Plus Version Only. 

• 
There have been several refinements to the program to produce better looking printouts for graphs and reports. 

• 
Updated the routine to locate an appropriate version of Adobe Acrobat ™ to view the PDF  files for the user manual. 

• 
A new Preference has been added to allow you to change the line colors used for graphing and printing graph lines.  (Fig A24)   

• 
New Format option to Open/Save/Edit a particular graph format.  This allows you to save the graph type, graph scales, etc to a particular name.  Then you can easily Open these saved formats to reproduce a graph format in the future.  This is available by clicking on Format, then Open/Save/Edit Graph Format.  (Fig A25) 

• 
The Graph screen now has a Format feature to display the “Legend” (line labels) on the right side in a larger font, and scroll up and down through the labels.  Since the font is larger, not all labels can be displayed on the screen if several data types are being graphed.  (Fig A26)    

• 
The Graph screen can now accommodate up to 72 individual graph lines (data types).  (Fig A26) 

• 
Added several new features for writing ASCII files from reports.  (Fig A27)  


o 
Report names can now include the path. 

o 
Now you can browse to find or create a file name and path for writing the ASCII file. 

o 
ASCII reports can now include the test comments. 

o 
Program now remembers ASCII file settings. 


• 
The Preference which allows you to choose a default Floppy/CD drive has been expanded to include letter drives from A to Z. 

• 
Program now prints headers of graphs and reports the same, and modifies the spacing to better ensure that long test file names are printed completely.  As mentioned earlier, you can also include a company logo graphic image in the Plus Version. 

• 
Made graph line flash rate independent of computer speed (.2 second flash rate).  


New Outputs (Features for Graphs and Reports): Note: All these new features apply Only to the Plus Version of Cam Analyzer. 
• 
You can now Advance and Retard the cam profile after it has been “Measured with Electronics”.  This is a very powerful feature for making adjustments and analysis after the cam has been measured.  Plus Version Only. (Fig A28) 

• 
You can convert most any cam data to the Cam Analyzer format of “Measured with Electronics”.  This format has several of additional analysis options available (like the several new Report Types below), and also enables you to use the Virtual Follower calculations.  This means that you can measure a cam profile by hand with the dial indicator directly on the cam lobe (no follower), convert it to this format, and then use the Virtual Follower calculations to see what this cam would do with various roller diameter followers, or OHC Rocker Arm geometries.  This also means that you can import a cam profile measured by some other system (Andrews, Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, etc) with the encoder directly on the cam lobe (no follower), and do the same Virtual Follower calculations.  Plus Version Only.  (Fig A29) 

• 
A new calculated output has been added of Asymmetry.  Asymmetry is the measure of how much more aggressive the intake opening profile is than the exhaust closing profile.  For a symmetric lobe, the opening and closing profiles are 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
the same (Asymmetry = 0).  If the opening profile is more steep (aggressive), then the lobe may have, say, 4 degrees of asymmetry at a particular lift, say .050” lift.  Technically this means the centerline at .050” lift is retarded from the centerline at the maximum lift point.  Plus Version Only.  (Fig A30) 
• 
Several new Report Types have been added for the Plus Version Only, which include: 

o 
Lobe Analysis Report, similar to the Cam Profile Evaluation Program reports in Don Hubbard’s book “Camshaft Reference Handbook”  (Fig A31) 

o 
Custom Duration Report, which lets you specify up to 20 lifts at which to measure duration, opening and closing events.  It also has options for the lifts to be tappet lift (like the standard duration report) or Valve Lift (correcting for lash and rocker arm ratio), and whether to include the new Asymmetry calculation. (Fig A32) 

o 
Seating Velocity Report, which calculates the valve closing velocity at several valve lashes of your choosing and 3 RPMs of your choosing.  Don Hubbard’s book “Camshaft Reference Handbook” gives some “rules of thumb” for acceptable seating velocities, which are included in the program. (Fig A33) 

o 
Checking Limits Report, which lets you design several checks to be made on the cam profile, like duration/opening event/closing event at a particular lift, maximum lift, centerline and lobe separation.  This is a particularily useful report if you are checking cams to meet some quality control specs or to see if they are legal for particular race classes. (Fig A34) 



• 
Added feature for doing Comparison Reports of one test versus another.  (Fig A35)  Plus Version Only. 

• 
A new Graph menu option is “Analyze”.  At this time the only option under this heading is “Find Difference Between Lobes”.  If you have graphed the same type lobes (intake or exhaust) from 2 different tests, the program will find the matched pairs of lobes, like Intake #2 for both tests.  It will then go through the difference in lift of both lobes at every 


0.1 degrees and save the largest difference. Then it will advance or retard the second lobe with respect to the first lobe and do this comparison again until it finds the advance and retard which produces the lowest maximum difference.  It will then report this maximum difference for each lobe pair.  (Fig A36) Plus Version Only. 
• 
A new “Watch Cam/Follower” screen lets you watch how the Virtual Follower is interacting with the measured cam profile. This new screen shows the instantaneous lift and rocker ratio both at each cam degree for the cam and now for the actual contact point on the cam. Data for the actual contact point shows more accurate instantaneous rocker arm ratios.  (Fig A37)  Plus Version Only. 

• 
The Cam Card now includes duration at either .200 inches or 5 mm lift.  (Fig A38)  Plus Version Only. 


New Features for Various Types of Cams, Cam Measurement Setups, and Electronics: 
Note:  Many new features in this section only apply to the Cam Analyzer version which has had the “Cam Test Stand” features activated. 
• Two new methods of indexing the rotary encoder have been added.  (Fig A39)  These new methods are used instead of you specifying a particular event occurs at a particular degree for the #1 Intake Lobe, typically, say, 106 deg Centerline.  These methods are: 
o 
User Finds TDC with Stops.   

o 
User Finds TDC with Sensor (typically for using the Performance Trends TDC Bridge)  Plus Version Only. 


For either method you will have a “Set TDC <F4>” option in the electronics Recording screen.  You will click on the 
option or press <F4> key and the program will direct you through a series of steps to find TDC.  
“User Finds TDC with Stops” is useful for measuring cams in the engine with a piston stop, or where you can place the rotary encoder exactly at TDC (for example by using the TDC mark on the engine damper).  If you select this method, the program will ask you to rotate the crank or cam (and therefore the encoder as well) until the piston encounters the stop.  Then it will ask you to rotate it the other way until it encounters the stop again.  The program will split the difference and now know exactly where TDC occurs. If you can place the cam, crank or encoder at exactly TDC, you will do that for the first stop, and then not move the cam, crank or encoder at all and call it the second point.  Splitting the difference of these 2 same points will produce these same 2 points as TDC. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
“User Finds TDC with Sensor” is typically used with the Performance Trends TDC Bridge.  It lets you turn the dowel pin or keyway used for timing the cam into a cam lobe.  The Bridge is now a flat tappet follower.  You place the linear encoder on the bridge, press <F4> and follow the program instructions.  It finds the “centerline” of the dowel pin or key way and indexes the rotary encoder appropriately.  Plus Version Only 
Notes: 
Most dowel pins or key ways are NOT positioned at TDC, but some degrees CW or CCW from TDC.  You will need to know that positioning to use this feature. For some popular cam designs, Performance Trends has provided that timing in the Cam Layout Details screen. 
Many aftermarket cams are NOT timed to the production timing of the dowel pin or keyway. 
• 
The Cam Design Layout now has spots for entering the location of the dowel pin or keyway from TDC in so many degrees, and whether it is CW or CCW.  See point immediately above.  (Fig A40)   

• 
The program now has several new Cam Types preloaded, like the 427 SOHC Ford, more generic 4 and 6 cylinder engines, more GM V-8s, etc. 

• 
The program has had several refinements for better and more accurate operation with Millimeter lift increments, including: 


o 
Conversion of more data and settings from inches to millimeters and vice versa when you change the Millimeters/Inches Preference. 

o 
You can now create standard cam profiles from simple inputs like Lift, Duration at 1 mm, etc using Millimeters. 

o 
Virtual Follower features now work with Millimeter dimensions and lift measurements. 


• 
The program can now better handle cams with just intake lobes, just exhaust lobes, or most any combination of lobes of up to 3 lobes for each cylinder, intake or exhaust.  These options are required for DOHC and other more modern engine designs.  Multiple lobes for the particular cylinder and designated A, B and C, like Int 1A, Int 1B, etc.  (Fig A41) 

• 
There is now a separate option for telling the program the cam you are measuring in either on the Cam Test Stand or In the Engine. The main difference are that if the cam is in the engine: 


o 
You do not need to know the Lifter Bore Angle Details. That is because the engine block and/or heads have the followers angled appropriately. 

o 
There is a good chance the linear encoder may extend when you are measuring lift, which could be on the valve itself or the follower.  On the stand the encoder always retracts (is pushed in) as the follower is lifted. 

o 
There is a chance the rotary encoder could be mounted on the crankshaft or some other rotating component instead of the camshaft. 


The first option can be selected in the Test/Cam Setup screen.  If this is selected, then everything is done the same except the Lifter Bore Angle Details are not used for timing when the lobes for the different cylinders.  However, the program may warn you that you should check the other 2 settings. 
The second 2 options are available for setting in the Electronics Recording screen.  If you select “Rotary Encoder Mounting as “Other Rotating Component”, then the program will ask you to rotate the cam until it sees the cam lobe repeat a second time.  Then it will determine how many encoder rotations are equal to 1 cam rotation.  All these options are available in the Basic Version except “Other Rotating Component”.  (Fig A40) 
• The Plus version allows you to set some “More (advanced) Options” from the Test/Cam Setup screen.  (Fig A42) These 3 options are: 
o 
Typical Cam Lobe (opens and closes once) – default o or Cam Lobe may have 2 "bumps" (may open and close twice) 

o 
Just show data for Actual Lobe – default o or Show All data measured (all 400 deg) 

o 
Zero Lift is Average Lift Measured on Base Circle – default o or Zero Lift is Lowest Lift Measured on Base Circle 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
“Typical Cam Lobe (opens and closes once) – default” is a typical cam lobe with one opening and one closing profile.  “Cam Lobe may have 2 "bumps" (may open and close twice)” is used when the lobe has 2 opening and closing profiles.  This typically is used for Briggs and Stratton cams which have a small “Easy Pull” decompression lobe occur during the compression stroke. 
When you record a cam lobe with electronics, the Cam Analyzer measures a full cam rotation plus 40 degrees more (360+40=400 cam degrees).  The extra 40 degrees is to check for measurement accuracy.  The program then goes through all this data and tries to find where the base circle stops and the opening and closing ramps exactly start. Typically you are not interested in graphing the base circle measurements because it takes up space on the graphs and reports.  Then you would select “Just show data for Actual Lobe – default”.  If you want to view all 400 degrees of measured data, you would select “Show All data measured (all 400 deg)”. One case in particular is when you have selected the option “Cam Lobe may have 2 "bumps" (may open and close twice)”. 
Base circle of the cam is not exactly zero lift.  There is some small variation in the base circle lift and this is caused “runout”. Up to now, the Cam Analyzer has used the AVERAGE base circle runout as the zero lift setting.  Then you see small amounts of both positive and negative lift on base circle.  For example if base circle runout was .002 inches, you should see lifts from -.001 to +.001 inches.  That is the option of “Zero Lift is Average Lift Measured on Base Circle – default”. However, there are times you may want the very lowest lift measured on base circle to be zero lift, or ”Zero Lift is Lowest Lift Measured on Base Circle”.  One case in particular is when you have selected the option “Cam Lobe may have 2 "bumps" (may open and close twice)”. 
• 
Added new label to the Valve Train Layout, where you can pick whether the cam rotates CW or CCW in the layout drawing.  If you say the cam rotates CW in the drawing and the cam turns CW in the Cam Layout Details, then a label appears that the view of the valve train layout is from the Front of the engine.  If you say the cam rotates CCW in the drawing and the cam turns CW in the Cam Layout Details, then a label appears that the view of the valve train layout is from the Rear of the engine.    

• 
Added new ‘Clc’ button in the Valve Train Layout screen to allow you to calculate the required of Angle and Distance for various pivot points based on X and Y dimensions. 

• 
Added option to customize the calibration of the linear (lift) sensor in the Tester Calibration screen. 

• 
The program will now work with some models of the Cam Pro Plus ™ electronics.   

• 
Program now does more extensive checking of valid com ports for communicating to Performance Trends Black Box and Black Box II.  It checks up to Com Port 16, and gives better suggestions at valid ports.  There is also a “Find” button in the Test Calibration specs screen to find your electronics by checking all available Com Ports. This feature is in the Basic version also, but only with the Measure with Electronic Sensors feature added. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 








Figure A29 Converting Cam Data to “Measured with Electronics” 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A 32 Custom Duration Report 
Here you can select the type of report to make. 
For the Advanced Reports (bottom 3 in the drop down list shown on this screen), a “More Report Settings” button is displayed. Click on it for the “More Report Options screen shown to the upper right. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018  Cam Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure A33 Seating Velocity Report  
This screen has 3 tabs for the 3 different Report Types which use these additional settings.  

You can either Save settings, or Get some previously Saved settings by clicking on these buttons. You will only Save or Open settings for one particular tab. That means if you save Seating Velocity settings, you are not saving Custom Duration or Checking Limits settings. 
Check out Don Hubbard’s book “Camshaft Reference Handbook” for lots of cam design suggestions.  In it he talks about seating velocity and choosing an acceptable one for durability.  The velocity in inches per second (or mm per second) changes with the engine RPM you are running.  That is why you can enter up to 3 RPMs for checking. The Valve Lashes you enter are actual valve lash, and not tappet lifts.  These valve lashes will change as you change the Rocker Arm Ratio setting in the Test/Cam Setup screen. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 





Figure A35 Comparison Reports Between Different Test Files 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A36 Analyze Feature on Graph Screen 
Click on Analyze, the Find Difference Between Lobes. Note: This only works on separate tests. This analysis does not work for comparing lobes within the same test. 
The Difference found are given in a Notepad text file so you can choose to print them, save them or copy them as needed. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 







Appendix 6: New Features in v4.0 
Cam Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.0 for Windows. These include 3.2A (Appendix 3), 3.2B (Appendix 4), v3.8 (Appendix 5) and now v4.0 (Appendix 6).  Here is a listing of some of the new features for Version 4.0: 
Cam Analyzer v4.0 actually has 5 different versions now, which include: 
• 
Cam Analyzer Basic (for analyzing cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus  (for more detailed analyzing of cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Basic for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand (CTS) sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors, with advanced “Cam Grinder” features 


Note that some of these new features apply only to the Plus Version and/or “Cam Grinder” version of the software.  Also note that the “Cam Grinder” version contains all Plus Version features. 
New Features for the “Cam Grinder” Version Only: 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to measure each lobe and NOT adjust for lifter bore angles and firing order. Instead of all Intake and Exhaust lobes lining up on top of each other (except for manufacturing variations), the lobes fall out as they would as you look at the end of the cam.  This is how most Cam Grinders prefer to see the results displayed.  Fig A44B. 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to measure the absolute lift of the lobes and bearings.  This way you can get a picture of the cam as viewed from the end, with all lobes shown as they are ground on the cam.  You also can see how the lobes compare to the journals and how the journals look compared to each other (cam bent).  In doing this, the program first asks you to measure the journals lying on the V blocks, or first and last journal on cam if mounting the cam on centers.  This you do with a micrometer.  Then the program steps you through a sequence of measurements on these journals on the stand.  This way any slight slope of the cam on the stand is corrected for.  After that, you must be careful to not adjust the height of the linear encoder as this will cause errors in height measurements.  This way also allows the CTS (Cam Test Stand) to measure the base circle of each lobe. Figs A45, A46. 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to pick various data types to graph and combine them on 1 graph.  It also includes several new data types for graphing (Figs A47-52), like: 
• 
Absolute Lift (This is lift measured from the center line of the cam.  If you have a 1.100” diameter base circle and a .400” max tappet lift, you should see approximately .550” of lift on base circle and .950” (.550” + .400”) of lift at max lift.)  Figs A47, A48, A49. 

• 
Thrust Angle  (For a roller cam, this is the angle the contact force is acting on the follower, typically putting some amount of side loading or thrust on the follower.) 

• 
Contact Point (How far from center of the follower has the contact point moved.)  Fig A50. 

• 
Radius of Curvature (The radius of curvature at this particular point on the Actual Cam Profile.) 

• 
Raw Cam Data as Measured (This is what the linear encoder measured.) Fig A49. 

• 
Actual Cam Profile (This is what a “knife edge” pointer would have measured.  This is the “Raw Cam Data as Measured” but correcting for the radius of the pointer which was doing the measurements.  This should be what a cam grinder would have for a design file.)  Fig A47. 

• 
Lift Frequency Analysis * 

• 
Acceleration Frequency Analysis (Fig A52). * 

• 
Jerk Frequency Analysis * 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
* These Frequency Analysis graphs can be done either vs Order Number or RPM Based on the Natural Frequency of a valve spring.  The specs for the Natural Frequency of the Valve Spring are contained in the Test/Cam Setup Screen. See Appendix 7 for more details on this Frequency Analysis, FFT Analysis. 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to import X and Y data or Polar coordinates of degrees and radius to generate a cam profile.  This is done by clicking on the Tappet Lift title column.  Then the Edit Test Data screen opens up and there are new Advanced Import Features with several options.  Figs A53, A54.   
The Cam Grinder version of the program lets you enter valve spring info to estimate the spring’s natural frequency.  This allows Frequency Analysis graphs to be graphed vs Engine RPM rather frequency order number.  Fig A52 and Appendix 7. 
Program has an "Export Manufacturing Style Cam File".  Two basic formats are currently available, P File and X,Y Data.  Fig A55. 
Program has an “Export Graph Data as File” option, so you can export any data you can graph as a comma separated text (ASCII) data file. If you click on this option, the program will ask for a file name.  If you give it a .csv extension, it will open directly in Microsoft Excel.  Fig A50. 
Program has an Edit option of “Cut and Append”.  Say you have recorded 360 degrees of data (typical for a “Measured with Electronics” file), but the data starts right at the opening ramp.  You would like to have the data start about 100 degrees before the opening ramp.  You could use this command to take copy the last 100 data points and put them before the opening ramp.  When done, it would appear that you started recording the data 100 deg earlier.  (Typically this is only needed for fixing mistakes, or working with VERY unusual cams like the Ducati desmodromic cam.) 
You can now select for a variable amount of Filtering (smoothing) the cam lift data when exporting cam files (None, Some, Medium, Heavy).  (This is not allowed for cam files exporting “Raw” data.) 
Major New Features for v4.0 Plus Version (also in Cam Grinder Version): 
The program can now use most any radius pointer for measuring a cam for doing the Virtual Follower analysis.  This means that you could measure a cam with the .750" diameter Universal Roller and then correct to what it would be with a .800", or .700" diameter roller.  You can also correct to something really different, like the exact cam profile as ground, like you were measuring the cam with a "knife edge" pointer.  An additional advantage of using a follower instead of the encoder probe directly is no side loading is put on the encoder probe, thus avoiding possible damage.  Figs A44A, A56. 
The Virtual Follower screen can now be enlarged for analysis in greater detail.  Fig A56. 
You now have 2 options for Analyze option at the graph screen:  Just show 'the max difference between lobes, or show the difference between the lobes at all data points.   
Now the program draws the actual profile lift (like the profile was measured with a “knife edge” pointer) on the Virtual Follower screen, in addition to follower lift.  The program draws this in green and made the text boxes green which relate to this measurement.  Fig A56. 
Cam Card now has options for printing, printer setup, including a lobe from a different file for either an intake or exhaust lobe if the cam you are currently reporting has only Intake or Exhaust lobes, or including the Company Logo graphics file on the card.  Fig A57. 
Program now has a “Filtering” option to quickly find files fitting certain criteria.  This would be like finding all files which have “CHEV” in the file name or the comments 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
section, or files having the number “346” in the Grind number recorded after a certain date, etc.  Fig A56 and Appendix 8. Seating Velocity report now includes option to estimate the lash point on cams.  Fig A59. The Custom Duration reports now have an option for including asymmetry. 
Major New Features for v4.0 Std Version (also in Plus and Cam Grinder Versions): 
New emailing options have been added in Preferences to work better with most any emailing system, like gmail, yahoo, etc. .  Fig A60. 
Program now has the ability to import just 1 lobe from a single lobe data file, like S96 or Comp Cams format into an existing Cam File.  This allows you to build a cam consisting of and Intake and Exhaust lobe where the lobes can come from 2 different sources (different files and different file formats).  Fig A91. 
When opening files, a new option has been added of "List by Date File was Last Saved".  This lets you more quickly find files you have recently changed or worked with. 
Program will now allow direct conversion from most any type of data to 'Measured with Electronics' in a 2 step process.  This conversion is necessary to allow you to do more advanced analysis of cam data. 
Minor Changes/Bug Fixes for v4.0: 
Added a Preference under the Calculations tab so you can change the lash the program assumes for doing Valve Lift, Acceleration, Velocity, etc graphs and reports.  Note that the Cam Card always assumes .006 inches for doing Advertised duration and events.   
You can now select 'Some' for 'Lift Filtering' for making a Graph or Report for most all cam files EXCEPT those Measured with Electronics or Created from Simple Specs. This was what was done prior to v4.0.  Now you have an additional option of 'Some (including meas. w elec.)' so that you can do further smoothing of the recorded lift data.  This can be especially useful when creating certain special graphs, like Simulating the Actual Cam Profile when it was measured with the pointer or a roller of a certain diameter.   
Fixed bug where conversion to 'Measured by Hand' was not done correctly if you asked for it almost immediately after opening 
up the program. Program now keeps ALL cam file data points imported from Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, etc for Plus or Cam Grinder versions.  Limit for std version is still data points with .0015” lift or greater. 
Program now correctly keeps cam Centerlines, Advance, etc when you import Cam Dr files when you ask to keep ALL timing events. Printed graphs have been improved.  Previously there could be a “broken” border on the left side. Fixed some bugs where doing graphs where extra lobes could be included in a graph which were not requested.   
Fixed a bug where a graph may not be updated correctly if you did not go back through the Graph Specs screen. Program now does not do additional smoothing to lift curve if data is from a computer generated file.  This is to save considerable calculation time. 
Company Logo now appears on the main screen.  Plus and “Cam Grinder” Version Only.  Fig A44B. Printouts have been refined to look better with various screen resolutions and operating systems.  The program now better imports certain data files which may have been stored in different units than what the program is set up 
for, inches vs mm. Fixed bug where Intro Help Messages would cause the first graph open when starting program to possibly be bad.   Added more Cam Layout templates, 240/300 Ford 6 cylinder, 170/200 Ford 6 cylinder, 250/292 Chevy 6 cylinder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
The program now looks for lift points greater than 10 inches when reading in Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, etc cam files and edits them out.  This can occasionally happen and is likely caused from the imported file being slightly corrupted, or being a slightly different version than we have encountered before. 
Fixed a minor bug where the graph on the main screen may not completely show all lobes. 
Fixed a bug where the graph screen could be significantly more narrow than what was available on the screen.   
In the Plus and Cam Grinder versions, now you can Advance or Retard the cam degree wheel readings by up to 360 degrees under the Edit options.  If you do this command more than once, you can advance or retard readings even more.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A44B “Cam Grinder” Timing Option to show Absolute Timing of Lobes  
You must first turn on this Preference to see options shown to the right. This is to prevent mistakes and unusual results which are possible if you don’t understand these options. 
Cam Grinder timing is shown below. “Typical” timing is when all intake and exhaust lobes lie on top of each other. 
Choose this option to measure Absolute Lift (base circle) and journal diameters. Fig A45 shows procedure to measure Absolute Lift and Journal Diameters. 
Company Logo on Main Screen 
Graph produced when data is graphed without correcting for lifter bore angles or firing order. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A45 Procedure to Measure Absolute Lift of Lobes and Journals 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A46 Procedure to Measure Absolute Lift of Lobes and Journals, cont. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 






Figure A50 New “Cam Grinder” Graph Options and Graph Data, cont. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A51 New “Cam Grinder” Graph Options and Graph Data, cont. 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Figure A53 New “Cam Grinder” Edit Feature to Copy X/Y or Deg/Lift Data 
This figure shows how you can edit an existing data file.  You can also “edit” a NEW file which was created by clicking on “File”, then one of the “New” options. 
The “Copy/Delete/Paste Tappet Lifts” edit option is very powerful. If you click on it, you may be given the warning message below. 
The only “Type of Cam Data” which can be manually edited is “Measured by Hand”. This particular cam file is currently shown as “Type of Cam Data” as “Measured with Electronics”. Therefore a conversion must be made before it can be edited. 
If you click on Test Options at the top of the main screen, this Test Options screen shows the “Type of Cam Data” is “Measured with Electronics”.  Click on this drop down and choose “Measured by Hand” as shown in the lower left corner. 
Once you do this, the program will show the message to the upper right, and you will have to confirm you really want to make this change.  To be safe, you may want to save your file to a different name first (File, then Save As) so you can return to your data before you make this significant change. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A56 New Virtual Follower Features 
You can pick from 2 standard radius pointers, or type in most any radius. For example, if you measured the cam with a .800” diameter roller (.400” radius), you would enter .400 here. Then you could specify a different Follower Roller Diameter on this screen and see how the actual valve lift curve changes. 
You can now resize or Maximize this screen to take advantage of screens with high resolution. 
Green color shows lift on cam actual profile (as compared to lift at contact point) Contact Patch 
Thrust Angle 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 






Figure A61 Importing File for Just 1 Lobe, to Combine with Existing Cam File 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 


Appendix 7: FFT Analysis in v4.0 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to pick various data types to graph.  These include: 
• 
Lift Frequency Analysis * 

• 
Acceleration Frequency Analysis * 

• 
Jerk Frequency Analysis * 


This Frequency Analysis is performed by doing a FFT (Fast Fourier Transformation) on the Lift, Acceleration or Jerk curves.  The theory behind Fourier Transformation is that any repetitive wave form can be represented by some combination of mathematical sine waves.  The repetitive wave form for cam analysis is the cam lift curve occurs every 360 degrees of camshaft rotation.  FFT is a mathematical method to determine what major frequency components (sine waves) make the cam lift profile.   
Cam analysis work has been done to determine that if major frequencies in the Valve Acceleration curve exist at low enough frequencies, and if these frequencies match up to the natural frequency of the valve spring, spring surge problems can occur.  Think of an “out of balance” tire on your car.  If you drive at 60 MPH, you may not notice the imbalance at all, but drive at 70 and you can barely hold on to the steering wheel.  At 70 MPH you have hit one of the natural frequencies of the suspension system, which is being excited by the natural frequency of the tire.  At 60 MPH, the frequency may be 5.4 Hz and 70 MPH may be 6.3 Hz (cycles per second) depending on tire size. 
The same is true of the valve train.  If the natural frequency of the primary valve spring is 300 Hz and a large frequency component of the valve acceleration profile match up, then spring surge may occur.  When this occurs, just like the steering wheel wants to jump out of your hand, the valve spring and valve train are very hard to control.  If possibly, you want to avoid RPMs which produce acceleration frequencies which are close to the natural frequency of the valve spring. 
Don Hubbard, previously of Crane Cams, in his outstanding book “Camshaft Reference Handbook” has developed some limits which should be avoided for various valve train design.  These are: 
Limit  Valve Train Type  
.22  Direct acting OHC (overhead cam) buckets valve trains  
.18  OHC rocker arm valve trains  
.12  Pushrod/rocker arm valve trains  

The program offers to do FFT analysis of the Lift and Jerk data as well.  However, we don’t know of any limits which have been developed for FFT analysis of these curves.  You should get a copy of Don’s book for more details.   
The procedure to do this analysis are outlined in Figure A62, and include: 
• 
Obtain a cam file and convert to “Measured with Electronics”.  If you measure with our Cam Test Stand, this happens automatically. 

• 
Enter data for the Primary Valve Springs, which is typically the largest spring (outer spring) in a valve spring pack via the Cam/Test Setup screen. 

• 
Set a description for the Valve Train Type in the Primary Valve Spring screens also. 

• 
Request the Valve Accel Frequencies Data Type and set Graph vs Nat. Freq. RPM to Yes. 

• 
Make a graph and find the lowest frequency RPM which goes above the limit set for the valve train type.  The frequency RPM below this is the safe RPM limit for this particular valve lift profile with these valve springs.  


IMPORTANT: This analysis is done on the Valve Acceleration curve.  Therefore it will change depending on the Rocker Arm Ratio and Lash you enter into the Cam/Test Setup screen. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Appendix 8 Filter Test Files (Plus Version Only) 
The v4.0 Cam Analyzer has a powerful way to search for tests in the Test Library called the Filter Option.  Click on the Filter button in the Open Test File menu (Figure A58) to be presented with the screen shown below. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
The Filter Feature is very useful for finding a specific test or to find all the tests which meet a certain set of conditions. For example, say you want to find a test that Operator “Jack” ran for Customer “Smith” on a “Big Block Chevy” cam.  Or, say you want to check on all tests run with 1.5 intake rocker arms, where “1.5” would be in the “Intake Rocker Arm” field in the Test Conditions screen.  Or perhaps you want to find all Crower cams that “Jeff” measured . In all these cases, the filtering specs would allow you to find the test files. 
First you must select the condition you want to look for by clicking on the down arrow button on the 'This comment or spec' box. Your choice of this spec will determine what the 'Has this relationship' options are, and what specs can be entered in the 'To what I enter here' spec. 
You can select up to 3 conditions to look for.  For the Operator “Jack”, Customer “Johnson”, “Big Block Chevy” example above, you would need to search for 3 conditions.  For the “1.5” intake rocker arm example, you could just search for 1 condition. You add conditions by checking the 'Include this condition also' box. This enables the other specs for each condition. 
If more than 1 condition is being used for the search, you must determine if you want the search to include tests which fit ANY of the conditions (Or) or must match ALL conditions (And).  For example, if you are looking for tests run by either Operator Jack or Operator Joe, you would select “Or”.  If you want Tests which made more than 1.5 intake rocker arm ratio and were done since Jan 2012 (the tests must match both conditions), you would select “And”. 
The 3 command buttons will do the following: 
Show Files Only Fitting These Conditions will return you to the Open Test File screen.  Only files fitting these conditions will be displayed (which may be no files in some situations).  You can click on various folders (or whatever name you have given to folders in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen) to see if there are any matches in other folders. 
Turn Off Filtering (show all files) will return you to the Open Test File screen and now all files will be displayed. 
Print List of All Files Fitting These Conditions will search through the entire Test Library (all folders in the CAMDATA folder) for files matching these conditions and display them in a new screen.  From this screen, you can also print the list.  This is the quickest way to see which folders may contain test files matching your conditions. 

Tip:  When looking for a word, the program doesn’t care if it is in CAPITAL (upper case) or small (lower case) letters. In Figure A64 above you are looking for the word BowTie in the test comments.  The program will display all files which have the word “BowTie” or the word “BOWTIE” or the word “bowtie” or the word “BowTIE” anywhere in the comments.  The program will not find files with the words “Bow Tie” (with a space between Bow and Tie) .  Therefore, it may be smarter to just look for the word “bow” to avoid this problem.  Note, however, that if you do this, the program will also find tests with the word “elbow”  or “crossbow” , for example, in the test comments. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 9: New Features in v4.3 
Cam Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.0 for Windows. These include 3.2A (Appendix 3), 3.2B (Appendix 4), v3.8 (Appendix 5), v4.0 (Appendix 6) and now v4.3.  Here is a listing of some of the new features for Version 4.3: 
Cam Analyzer v4.3 actually has 5 different versions, which include: 
• 
Cam Analyzer Basic (for analyzing cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus  (for more detailed analyzing of cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Basic for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand (CTS) sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors, with advanced “Cam Grinder” features 


Note that some of these new features apply only to the Plus Version and/or “Cam Grinder” version of the software.  Also note that the “Cam Grinder” version contains all Plus Version features. 
New Features for the “Cam Grinder” Version Only: 
We’ve added a feature to allow for a Test Piece picture to be included with your test files and printouts.  Program now does not 
print pictures if either the Logo or Test Piece picture file does not exist.  Fig 9.1 and 9.2A. Cam Grinder Version has new options where you can create a Cam Card from separate intake and exhaust files in the special Cam Grinder Timing format.  Cam Grinder Timing files were added in v4.0 and do not force the centerlines to line up from different cylinders.  They do not account for lifter bore angles or firing order effects.  Instead the profiles look much as they would when looking at the end of the cam. 
New Graph and Report option for Cam Grinder, allow for Crank Degrees or Cam Degrees.  If doing Cam Degrees, the program turns Off the Labels of TDC and BDC and always numbers the degrees in reports as numbers, not as a deg wheel.  Fig 9.2. 
In Cam Grinder version, added a new Rezero Rotary Sensor Option in the Record screen.  Fig 9.3. In Cam Grinder version, added a new Rezero Lift Sensor Option in the Record screen to allow you to specify a certain lift value to be for the lift sensor at it's current position.  Fig 9.3. 
Added a new profile type for “Measure with Electronics” of "Measure Anything", for cams which are not typical automotive 
cams.  Fig 9.4. Added a new Graph Type for the Cam Grinder called Overlap Area.  It can be done for either Valve Lift or Tappet Lift.  You must also include both Intake and Exhaust Valve or Tappet Lift graphs for this graph to be produced.  Fig 9.5. 
Program now allows for .csv types of output formats and Blair file formats for Exporting.  Fig 9.6. Crank Degrees can now be shown on the Electronics Recording screen in addition to Cam Degrees.  Fig 9.3. Program has several new features for Exporting Manufacturing Files, including: 
• 
Added special feature for exporting a Master Cam file.  Fig 9.7. 

• 
Added option to export Manufacturing Type file in IGES or IGS format.  Then you can also specify the base circle to .igs files.  Fig 9.9 – Fig 9.11 

• 
Added feature to allow user to zero out runout on measured profile.  If you set this to Yes, the program will find what the program believes to be the start of the opening ramp and end of the closing ramp.  Then whichever lift is higher will be assigned the lift of the base circle of the master cam to be created.  This will eliminate any runout of the measured profile being passed on to the master cam.  The 'downside' of doing this is that if there is a significant difference between lifts at these 2 points (bad runout on measured cam), there could be a discontinuity at start or end of one of the ramps.  Fig 9.9 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Added feature to increase or reduce the lobe durations (stretch or compress duration) by a percentage.  Fig 9.12 
Cam Grinder version lets you manually generate degrees up to 720 degrees.  This can be handy for converting cam files “Measured with Electronics” to “Measured by Hand” so you can do modifications on them. The program now allows much larger Roller Follower diameters, to simulate grinding stones on cam grinders. If this is set, duration and events are done in Cam Degrees, the Degree Wheel data on main screen is now labeled "Cam 
Degrees" if doing Cam Grinder timing.   Added the ability to read .P files.  Click on File, then Open from All Saved Tests and click on a .P file to open it.   
New Features for the Plus Version Only: 
There is now a Preference setting to let you keep the Graph on the main screen always at the same graph scales.  This can cause problems if you open files for cams with different lifts and durations than you normally run, or the cams you test produce quite different lifts and durations.  However, if your cams are always about the same lift and duration, this new Preference makes it easier to spot changes with the graph on the main screen.  Fig 9.13 
Program now states events on the Cam Card are at valve lift if you are using virtual follower rocker arm "Cam on Rocker".   
If you are creating a Cam Card from a file which contains only intake or only exhaust data, but you have already picked a file to be associated with this file for the other lobes data, the program now reminds you of the associated file when you create a cam card. You can also choose to change or cancel the file associated with this file. 
A new Overlap option has been added to the Custom Duration Report.  Fig 9.14 
Two major new Options screen have been added for the Cam Card, including when clicking on the Options button at the lower right:  More Options and Modify Labels.  Fig 9.15. 
The program now displays a graph title on the main screen, stating if the profile is measured with the actual follower, or simulated by Virtual Follower and what type of Virtual Follower.  Fig 9.4. 
The program now saves the current file as a temporary file before making a Cam Card, so that any changes made during creation of the Cam Card can be restored when program returns to the main screen.   
The program now allows a roller follower to be one tenth (0.1) the normal lower limit, which is nearly a "knife edge" for the Virtual Follower simulation.  This way the Cam Lift numbers can be very close to those measured by the actual pointer, or even smaller.   
The powerful “Filter” feature lets you search for files containing particular measurements, or comments, etc.  (See Appendix 8 for more info on this feature.)  Now the list of files fitting a particular “Filter” criteria are displayed in Notepad with better spacing to allow for very long file and folder names when you click "Print list of all files fitting these conditions".  This list now also includes the Cam Number.  Fig 9.16 
. 
New Features for All Versions: 
You can now request what to use for "Lift for Rating Events", either .050" .040" (1 mm) or .053" (for Harley Davidson).  Added 
Rated Lift to History Log, and better arranged spacing of History Log columns for information they must contain.  Fig 9.17. The new Mini USB is a possible logger type.  Right now this is just a direct replacement of the current Black Box II.  In the future we may add more features. 
Now if you import a cam profile, and the profile has 0.5 deg increments and more than 400 rows of data, the program checks to see if the first row has a whole degree increment like 0.0, 1.0, 2.0, etc or half degree 0.5, 1.5, etc.  The program will use the rows where there are whole degree increments.   
Replaced "Copy" with "Copy (or Merge)" to list of Folder Options possible in 'Save As' screen.  Fig 9.18. Program now explains why changes in 'Starting a New Test' screen are not saved if you don't start a new test.  Added features so program can check after writing the config file if it is corrupt and whether a backup should be made. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
A backup file of the config file is now made and used if the main config file has been corrupted.   Form for Starting a New Test now has larger fields for File, Folder, etc names to better display the names completely.  Fig 9.19. Program now saves tests to My-Tests folder if it's original folder was the Examples folder.  Overwriting a file from the 
Examples folder is not allowed. 
If you change the printer within the program to something other than the computer's default printer, the program now restores the default printer and printer orientation when it shuts down.   Program now adjust length of folder and file name in History Log to better fit in available space in the 1st column. You can now import files from the Performance Trends Quick Cam Checker.  You need v1.1 A.015 or later of the Cam 
Checker, which should be a free download on the PerformanceTrends.com website under Downloads.  NOTE:  The precision of 
these files are not as good as those measured with the Cam Analyzer on our Cam Test Stand.  Fig 9.20 to Fig 9.22. Added several new features to the “Save As” screen so you can see other files in folders and select these file names as the name to use or edit to use as a new file name.  It also has simplified the method of creating a new folder, and listing these file names by date or name.  Fig 9.23 
Now the browser should be the default on your computer.  Previously it only looked for Internet Explorer.   When you resize the main screen, it is more reliable at refreshing all controls and pictures.   Program can now better display PDFs in some versions of Windows 10.   Did lots of refinements to the buttons on the Graph screen which let you enlarge or shrink the graph, or shift the graphs left, 
right, up and down.  Prior to this, the action could get "stuck" or not do the action exactly as expected.   Program has several refinements for reading CPP files more accurately and reliably. Added new Cam Layout types of "Hemi 99" for race only Mopar, the modern Mopar Hemi 5.7/6.1/6.4L, the GM Gen V LT-4 
2015, and fixed a bug in Pontiac cam design layout.  Cam Layout types are used for data files types of “Measuring with 
Electronics”.  Fig 9.24. Program now reports significant figures for lift to 5 decimal places.  The measurement resolution of lift sensor is .00004 inches, so going to more than 5 decimal places does not produce any more accurate results. 
Program can now read SVL files (from 4stHEAD program). 
Program now just displays "Hydraulic" or "Solid" for the Lifter Type for cams that are Measured with Electronics.  Previously you could specify various roller or flat Lifter Types, but that did not make sense for cams that are Measured with Electronics. Replaced linear interpolation with curve fitting for exporting cam files for all versions.   Files and folders you delete now are actually sent to the Recycle Bin so they can be recovered later if you want.  Fig 9.25. Program is now better at adding numbers to the end of file names by default. Now when you open a file which has a Graph Name specified in the History Log, that Graph Name stays with the file.  
Previously it was restored to the default File Name as being the Graph Name.   
Program now tells you your specs "MATCH" the master specs.  Before it said "DO MATCH" and many people mistakenly read this as "DO NOT MATCH". Fixed minor bug where if you changed the Graph Name for the first file in the History Log, it would not stay permanently.  Fixed bug where if cam file has only exhaust lobes, you could not open it from the History Log on the main screen.   Refined the program to be better at reading Black Box II when you have selected the Preference of 'Assume Asian Operating 
System'. When converting files between Inches and MM lift, now the program uses more decimal places for all files types for more precise conversions.   
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.2A Print Options for the Test Piece Picture 
Click here in Graph Screen for printing Test Piece picture options. 
Options for printing Graphs. 
Click here in Report Screen for printing Test Piece picture options. 
Options for printing Reports. 
Graph printout with Test Piece Picture with Make Picture Smaller not checked. If in Landscape view, this will work differently. 
Graph printout with Test Piece Picture with Make Picture Smaller checked. If in Landscape view, this will work differently. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.3 Resetting Lift and Degrees in Recording Screen 
New Rezero Options 
Option checked to display Crank Degrees. 
Crank Degrees being Displayed. 
Readings now read as you directed by screens above. This feature is typically only useful for manually finding different things on the stand, like, how much lift on the intake ramp is produced by exactly 10 degrees of rotation. A cam profile measured with these changes will be exactly the same without these changes. However the timing will be changed by the amount you changed the rotary encoder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.4 Measure Anything Option To Measure Unusual Cams 
Cam with unusual profile being measured with special “Precision Tip” Turn this Preference On for “Measure Anything” option. 
Cam Grinder and Plus versions show if lift is simulated by Virtual Follower. 
Choose this type of Lobe 
Because there may not be a normal “base circle” for unusual cams, it is typically best to also set this option for Zero Lift. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Figure 9.7 Advanced Export Manufacturing File Options 
Choose this Export Type 
Master cam profile. 
“Yes, spec base circle” and you enter the diameter of the base circle when the master is finished. 
“Yes, spec blank OD” and you enter the Outside diameter of the blank that the master will be created from 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
FAQ From Website: How do I create a manufacturing file to exactly copy of a cam lobe I just measured? 
You need the Cam Grinder version of the Cam Analyzer to do this. First you must measure the cam using the Virtual Follower option, available via the "See Virtual Follower Details" button in the Test/Cam Layout screen, as shown in the screen below. 
You can use either the .750" diameter Universal Roller or the linear encoder's standard tip directly on the cam lobe.  The critical specs to set are the Base Circle you will measure from the cam you are measuring, specifying one of the Virtual Follower "Follower Types" (recommend Virtual Roller), and the Probe Radius you are using. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

Then measure the lobe you want to duplicate with the Cam Test Stand.  When you have the lobe measured, click on File at upper left of main screen, the Export Manufacturing Style File from the list. 
In the Export screen which comes up, choose IGS as the file type at top (or one of the others if you are sure you can use that type), the file name, file destination and which Lobe to Use (the one you measured).  Then click on the Make File button.  IGS is the Format recommended because many CAD/CAM programs like SolidWorks and Mastercam will import it directly. 
A portion of the resulting IGS file is shown below in Notepad below. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.12 Edit Feature to Increase or Reduce Duration of a File 
Click Edit, the “Increase or Reduce Durations” 
Note: You can only do this to profiles “Measured by Hand”. You may have to convert a different type of profile (like “Measured with Electronics”) to “Measured by Hand” before doing this edit. Check Appendix 5, Figure A29 which describes converting a file to “Measured with Electronics”. Converting to “Measured by Hand” works similar. 
Profile with Durations increased 10% 
Original Profile 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.13 Preference to Always Use Same Graph Scale on Main Screen 
Turn this Preference to “Use Settings Below” to enable Graph settings. 
Graph on main screen using Preference settings 
If a cam profile does not fit in these settings, it may be cut off the display or be shown very small. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.14 New Overlap Output for Custom Duration Reports 
Choose Custom Duration report and select “Intake & Exhaust” for “Lobes to Report” Choose one of these settings with “Overlap”. 
Click here to bring up screen to the right. 
Overlap shown for the different lifts. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018  Cam Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure 9.16 New Features for Filtering (Finding) Files  See Appendix 8 for more info on using the Filter feature.  

Click here to find all files meeting your search (find or filter) criteria. 
Search results are now shown in Notepad so you can print, save, or copy them to the clip board. 
The width of these columns adjust to fit whatever width is need to completely show the names. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018  Cam Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure 9.17 Lift for Rating Events  In Test/Cam Setup screen you can now specify what lift should be used for determining events and durations.  

Duration and events for that lift shown on main screen. 
Lift for Rating Events shown here in Test Summary. Test Summaries can be included in printouts. 
Events in History Log are also determined by this “Rated Lift”. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.20 Importing from Cam Checker 
Choose this Import option. 
If this current file does not have the profile you want to Import, click on File and open a different file. 
Locate the Cam­Checker.exe program, and click Open button at lower right. Once it is located, the program will remember it. 
Click here to review this Help Screen again. 
Click on a record (row) which has a Profile File to highlight it. 
Once you have selected a record, click the Graph Profile button. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.21 Importing from Cam Checker, cont 
Once the profile is graphed, click this button. 
The Cam Checker software will close and you can click this button once you are back at the Cam Analyzer. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.22 Importing from Cam Checker, cont 
After clicking on OK on the Cam Analyzer messages, enter a name for saving the data Imported from the Cam Checker. 
You can also choose a folder or choose to add a New Folder. 
Cam Analyzer with new Imported Cam Checker data and file name. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018  Cam Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure 9.23 New “Save As” Features  
Click on File, then Save As  

Click this Check Box for new info and options. Many times you may want to see what other files are in this same folder, or use one of these file names as the New Test Name, or possibly modify that name slightly. 
Here we are listing Test Files alphabetically by name. 
Using the Picked  
Choose a Test name from  name and then  
the list, then click here to  modifying it slightly.  
copy that name to the New  
Test Name field.  

Listing by Date 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.25 Saving Deleted Files and Folders to Recycle Bin 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Index 
2, 140, 141 
4stHEAD, 187 
Absolute Lift, 159 
Acceleration, 27, 41, 42, 43, 44, 52, 53, 54, 55, 88, 97, 98, 101, 103, 122, 124, 181 
Accuracy, 7, 1, 3, 78, 99, 103, 135, 141 
Accurate, 21, 35, 38, 44, 55, 78, 83, 85, 90, 99, 100, 116, 122, 123, 135, 139, 140, 187 
Accurately, 27, 30, 31, 38, 42, 54, 85, 91, 100, 101, 116, 117, 187 
Actual Cam Profile, 159, 161 
Actual Valve Lash, 23, 128 
Advanced, 14, 70, 71, 73, 75, 160 
Allow Direct Entry of Cam Numbers, 14, 20, 36 
Allow Not Smoothing Cam File, 20, 78 
Alternate Lifts for Reports, 19 
Graph, 139 
Andrews, 21, 71, 138 
Angle and Distance, 141 
ASCII File Options, 49 
Asian Operating System, 187 
Associated file, 186 
Assume, 187 
Assumes, 22, 24, 100, 118, 161 
Assumptions, 7, 3, 99 
Asymmetry, 138, 139, 161 
Audie Technology, 141 
Backing Up Data, 7, 107 
Backup, 14, 99, 107, 109, 110, 138, 186, 187 
Base Circle, 23, 24, 33, 86, 121, 122, 124, 140, 141, 159, 185, 195 
BDC, 25, 33, 42, 82, 185 
Black Box, 117, 118, 121, 122, 134, 135, 139, 141, 186, 187 
Bore, 129 
Browser, default, 187 
CA20, 2, 14, 69, 107, 109 
Calculation Menu, 141 
Calibration, 141 
Cam, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 62, 63, 64, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 107, 109, 110, 111, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 132, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 159, 160, 161, 162, 181, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 195, 196 Cam Analyzer, 1, 4, 1, 2, 4, 5, 9, 20, 21, 27, 39, 49, 62, 63, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 77, 78, 81, 84, 85, 88, 91, 92, 99, 100, 101, 103, 109, 129, 135, 137, 138, 139, 141, 159, 183, 185, 187, 195 
Cam Card, 139, 160, 161, 185, 186 
Report, 139 
Report, 160 
Report, 161 
Report, 185 
Report, 186 
Report, 186 
Report, 186 
Report, 186 
Cam Design, 120, 128, 129, 130, 140 
Cam Dr, 3, 6, 1, 17, 20, 21, 25, 42, 43, 49, 53, 54, 55, 68, 71, 72, 77, 78, 83, 101, 103, 104, 118, 137, 138, 161, 162 
Cam Grinder, 91, 159, 160, 161, 162, 181, 185, 186, 195 
Cam Grinder Timing, 185 
Cam Number, 14, 20, 36, 63, 83, 186 
Cam Pro, 3, 1, 21, 25, 49, 68, 71, 100, 101, 103, 105, 111, 138, 139, 141, 161, 162 
Cam Pro Plus ™, 141 
Cam Test Stand, 7, 1, 13, 21, 27, 117, 118, 122, 127, 137, 139, 140, 159, 181, 185, 187, 196 
Cam Timing Value, 120, 127, 128 
CamData, 9, 20, 36, 69, 71, 73, 75, 83, 107, 109, 184 
Camshaft, 118, 120, 122, 127, 129, 133, 134, 140, 181 
Camshaft Reference Handbook, 139, 181 
Centerline, 23, 25, 72, 128, 135, 139 
Report, 139 
Checking Limits Report, 139 
Clc Button, 141 
Clipboard, 111, 137 
Com Port, 118, 135, 141 
Comma Separated, 49 
Comma separated variable, 160, 185 
Comment, 29, 63, 64 
Comp Cam, 21, 71, 97, 111, 137, 161 
Company Logo, 138, 160, 161 
Compare Measurement Comments, 123 
Reports, 139 
Comparison Reports, 139 
Compression, 141 
Contact Point, 139, 159 
Convert to Columns, 49 
Copy, 68, 69, 71, 107, 109, 111, 137, 160, 181, 186, 195 
CPP, 187 
csv format, 160, 185 
Current Test, 9, 76, 81 
Cursor, 57, 59, 98 
Report, 139, 186 
Custom Duration Report, 139, 186 
Customer, 14, 15 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Cut and Append, 160 
Date, 14, 36, 83, 107, 109, 161, 187 
Default, 17, 19, 35, 77, 82, 137, 138, 140, 141, 187 
Default Floppy Disk XE "Disk"  Drive, 19 
Deg Steps, 21, 22, 33, 88, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103 
Degree Wheel, 6, 13, 15, 16, 25, 33, 42, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 91, 99, 100, 186 
Degree Wheel Type, 6, 25, 82, 86 
Delete, 14, 15, 68, 75, 87, 91, 187 
Designed Valve Lash, 23, 24 
Disk, 19, 73, 109 
Don Hubbard, 139, 181 
Dr Doctor, 21, 71 
Duration, 1, 2, 21, 22, 23, 27, 33, 41, 45, 46, 64, 81, 82, 83, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 94, 98, 99, 103, 122, 135, 137, 139, 140, 161, 186 
Duration Report, 41, 89, 90, 94 
Edit, 6, 14, 15, 57, 60, 76, 87, 91, 111, 137, 138, 160, 162, 187 
Edit, Cut and Append, 160 
Electronic Sensors, 1, 128, 137, 141, 159, 185 
Email, 1, 3, 137, 161 
Encoder, 118, 121, 122, 133, 138, 139, 140, 159, 160, 195 
Encoders, 122, 133, 140 
Engine Analyzer Pro, 1, 17, 77, 78, 137 
Error, 31, 89 
Errors, 27, 35, 42, 43, 45, 53, 55, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90, 100, 101, 116, 122, 124, 159 
Excel, 160 
Explorer, Windows, 2, 69, 73, 107, 108, 109, 110, 187 
Export, 42, 73, 111, 137, 160, 185, 196 
Exporting Manufacturing Files, 185 
EZ Data Entry, 6, 37, 87, 91, 137 
EZ Start Wizard, 4, 137 
FFT, 7, 160, 181 
File, 1, 2, 4, 6, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22, 25, 27, 29, 35, 42, 43, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 68, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 88, 93, 98, 100, 109, 110, 111, 118, 137, 138, 139, 159, 160, 161, 162, 181, 185, 186, 187, 196 
File Destination Path, 77 
File Name, 35, 49, 72, 75, 77, 82, 90, 187 
Files, manufacturing, 160, 185, 195, 196 
Files, P File, 160 
Files, X,Y Data, 160 
Filter, 7, 42, 43, 44, 52, 53, 54, 55, 78, 88, 92, 100, 101, 183, 184, 186 
Filter, files, 7, 42, 43, 44, 53, 54, 55, 67, 97, 98, 100, 160, 183, 184, 186 
Find Difference Between Lobes, 139 
Find TDC, 6, 1, 27, 83, 84, 91 
Firing Order, 132 
First Degree Wheel Reading, 33, 86 
Floppy Drive, 17, 109 
Folders, 20 Follower, 16, 82, 122, 124, 137, 138, 140, 159, 160, 186 For Cyl #, 22, 128 Frequency Analysis, 159, 160, 181 Frequency, natural, 160, 181 
Gaps, 124 
Gen V LT-4, 187 
Generate, 6, 1, 4, 15, 21, 23, 33, 85, 86, 87, 91, 160, 186 
GM Gen V LT-4, 187 
Graph, 1, 6, 10, 15, 17, 20, 44, 49, 51, 52, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 75, 76, 87, 88, 89, 91, 95, 96, 97, 98, 101, 103, 104, 111, 118, 123, 124, 126, 138, 139, 159, 160, 161, 162, 181, 185, 186, 187 
Graph XE "Graph"  Dot Matrix Printer XE "Printer"  Adjustment, 20 
Graph Format, 138 
Graph Line Colors, 138 
Graph Scales, main screen, 138, 186 
Graph Type, 6, 52, 97, 185 
Graphs, 6, 51, 56, 57, 62, 92, 96, 97, 100, 138 
Grid, 45 
Harley Davidson, 132, 186 
Heavy, 43, 44, 55, 160 
Help, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 15, 18, 35, 38, 82, 111, 120, 161 
Hemi, 187 
High Accels, 124, 135 
History Log, 6, 1, 16, 20, 39, 56, 65, 68, 75, 76, 95, 126, 186, 187 
HP, 24 
IGES, 185 
IGS, 185, 196 
Import, 1, 39, 137, 138, 160, 161, 186, 187, 196 
inches/cam degree, 41, 52 
Include .MSU and .DES Files, 78 
Include Text, 49 
Install, 4, 14, 17, 18, 21, 28, 29, 33, 35, 41, 52, 57, 72, 82, 84, 85, 99, 107, 111, 127, 137, 138, 140, 160, 181 
Int & Exh Duration, 45, 46 
Int & Exh Lobe Area, 46 
Int & Exh Raw Data, 45, 107 
Intake Duration, 89 
Journals, 133, 159 Just show data for Actual Lobe, 140, 141 
Keep Orig File's Lobe Separation, 25 knife edge, 159, 160, 186 
Lash, 7, 14, 19, 22, 23, 24, 41, 44, 45, 52, 71, 72, 128, 139, 161, 181 
Layout, 122, 128, 132, 133, 134, 140, 141, 161, 187, 195 
Legend, 57, 60, 76, 97, 124 
Library, 9, 10, 14, 16, 22, 56, 67, 68, 75, 107, 109, 183, 184 
Lift, 7, 1, 2, 6, 10, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 33, 37, 38, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 78, 81, 83, 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 111, 121, 122, 124, 128, 135, 137, 139, 140, 141, 159, 160, 161, 162, 181, 185, 186, 
Lift Filtering, 42, 43, 53, 54, 161 
Lift for Rating Events, 23, 186 
Lift Measurement, 7, 81 
Lifter, 16, 22, 23, 71, 82, 85, 86, 87, 91, 99, 100, 121, 122, 128, 129, 130, 132, 140, 159, 185, 187 
Lifter (profile) Type, 22, 23, 128 
Lifter Bore Angle, 128, 129, 130, 132, 140 
Line colors, 138 
List by Date File was Last Saved, 161 
Report, 139 
Lobe Analysis Report, 139 
Lobe Area, 2, 46, 47, 94, 98, 99, 101 
Lobe Center, 25 
lobe centerline, 84, 92, 135 
Lobe Description, 133 
lobe separation, 72, 81, 82, 89, 135, 139 
Lobe Separation, 25, 72, 91 
Logo, 185 
LT-4, GM Gen V, 187 
Main Screen, 6, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 35, 36, 38, 41, 42, 49, 51, 56, 68, 71, 75, 77, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 109, 111, 127, 133, 184 
Main Screen Graph Lines, 20 
Manufacturing, 160, 185, 196 
Master Cam, 185 
Max Error, 124 
Max Gaps, 123 
Max Lobe Lift, 22, 24 
Measure Anything, 185 
Measured with Electronics, 127, 137, 138, 160, 161, 181, 186, 187 
Merge, 186 
Method to Determine TDC, 84 
Metric, 111, 137, 140 
Millimeters, 111, 137, 140 
Mirror Image, 137 
Moderate, 43, 44, 55, 97, 98 
Mopar, 129, 187 
More (advanced) Options, 140, 186 
Multiply Vel/Accel/Jerk by 1000, 41 
New (start new test), 16, 120 
New Test, 6, 14, 15, 16, 33, 35, 36, 81, 82, 83, 91, 120, 121, 127, 186, 187 
Offset Firing, 132, 133 
Open, 6, 9, 16, 17, 19, 35, 67, 68, 70, 71, 75, 89, 93, 95, 109, 111, 118, 138, 183, 184, 186 
Open XE "Open" (from all saved tests), 16, 71, 93 
Open XE "Open" (from History Log XE "History Log" ), 16, 68 
Open/Save/Edit, 138 
Operating System, Asian, 187 Operator, 6, 14, 29, 35, 63, 82, 184 Order number, 160 overlap, 83 Overlap, 94, 185, 186 
P files, 186 
PDF, 111, 137, 138 
Performance Trends, 1, 3, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 17, 36, 77, 83, 128, 129, 130, 139, 140, 141, 187 
PERFTRNS.PTI, 2, 69, 107, 109 
Picture File, Test Piece, 185 
Plus Version, 3, 7, 1, 25, 49, 68, 111, 137, 138, 139, 140, 159, 160, 161, 162, 183, 185, 186 
Point, 15, 38, 87, 88, 91 
Pointer, 28, 29, 30, 33, 84, 89, 99, 124, 159, 160, 161, 186 
Polar, 160 
Pontiac, 187 
Preferences, 6, 9, 14, 18, 19, 36, 45, 64, 75, 78, 83, 118, 122, 134, 137, 161, 184 
Printed Graph Width, % of Page, 20 
Printer, 6, 17, 19, 20, 39, 57, 63, 64, 138 
Printer XE "Printer"  Fonts, 19, 64 
Probe, 85, 100, 160, 195 
Program Title Comments, 19 
Quick Cam Checker, 187 
Radius of Curvature, 159 
Raw Cam Data, 159 
Rckr Ratio/Lash, 14 
Readme, 2 
Recovered, 187 
Recycle Bin, 187 
registered, 3, 4 
Report Data Every, 42 
Report Type, 41, 44, 138, 139 
Restore, 107, 109, 110, 138 
Rezero, 185 
Rocker Arm, 14, 19, 22, 23, 24, 41, 44, 45, 52, 72, 85, 128, 138, 139, 181, 184, 186 
Rocker Arm Ratio, 22, 23, 24, 41, 44, 52, 72, 128, 181 
Rotary, 118, 122, 140, 185 
Runout, 141, 185 
S96, 21, 71, 72, 137, 161 
Save, 1, 6, 7, 9, 16, 17, 19, 35, 37, 38, 49, 67, 68, 70, 73, 75, 76, 87, 90, 91, 118, 138, 139, 161, 186, 187 
Scales, 61 
Scaling, 41, 42 
Report, 139 
Seating Velocity, 139 
Seating Velocity, 161 
Seating Velocity Report, 139 
Select Method to Determine TDC, 27 
Sensors, 137, 141, 159, 185 
Setup, 4, 17, 18, 21, 33, 35, 41, 52, 57, 72, 82, 85, 107, 111, 127, 137, 138, 140, 160, 181 
Shift, 62 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Show All data measured, 140, 141 
Smooth the Cam Data, 78 
Some, 4, 9, 20, 42, 43, 44, 53, 54, 55, 78, 85, 111, 122, 160, 161 
Spring, valve, 160, 181 
Summary Graph, 15, 16, 51, 86 
SVL, 187 
Tabs, 13 
Tappet, 1, 22, 23, 24, 46, 85, 86, 98, 99, 100, 139, 140, 159 
Tappet Lift, 16, 23, 24, 111, 160, 185 
TDC, 7, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 42, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 89, 99, 120, 127, 128, 139, 140, 185 
TDC Method, 120, 127, 128 
Test Data Grid, 13, 15, 16, 81 
Test Folder XE "Folders"  Name in Program, 20 
Test Operator, 14 
Test Piece picture, 185 
Test Setup and Cam Specs, 6, 7, 11, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 44, 67, 81 
Test Stand, 137 
test time, 14 
Thrust Angle, 159 
Time/Date, 36, 83 
Torque, 3, 24, 122 Total Cam Advance, 22, 24, 72 Troubleshooting, 135 Type of Cam Data, 21, 127 
Use Standard Lifts for Reports, 19 User Finds TDC, 139, 140 
valve lift, 7, 19, 21, 22, 24, 45, 52, 128, 181, 186 
Valve Spring, 160, 181 
Valve Train Layout, 141 
Vel/Accel/Jerk Filtering, 43, 44, 55, 97 
Velocity, 27, 41, 42, 43, 44, 52, 53, 54, 55, 62, 88, 98, 139, 161 
Version 4.0, 7, 159 
Virtual Follower, 137, 138, 139, 140, 160, 186, 195 
Watch Cam/Follower, 139 
Windows, 1, 3, 1, 2, 17, 20, 57, 68, 69, 73, 81, 100, 107, 108, 109, 110, 137, 138, 159, 185, 187 
Wizard, 4, 137 
worksheet, 17, 64 
Zero Lift, 140, 141 Zoom, 96, 98 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 6: New Features in v4.0 
Cam Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.0 for Windows. These include 3.2A (Appendix 3), 3.2B (Appendix 4), v3.8 (Appendix 5) and now v4.0 (Appendix 6).  Here is a listing of some of the new features for Version 4.0: 
Cam Analyzer v4.0 actually has 5 different versions now, which include: 
• 
Cam Analyzer Basic (for analyzing cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus  (for more detailed analyzing of cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Basic for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand (CTS) sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors, with advanced “Cam Grinder” features 


Note that some of these new features apply only to the Plus Version and/or “Cam Grinder” version of the software.  Also note that the “Cam Grinder” version contains all Plus Version features. 
New Features for the “Cam Grinder” Version Only: 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to measure each lobe and NOT adjust for lifter bore angles and firing order. Instead of all Intake and Exhaust lobes lining up on top of each other (except for manufacturing variations), the lobes fall out as they would as you look at the end of the cam.  This is how most Cam Grinders prefer to see the results displayed.  Fig A44B. 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to measure the absolute lift of the lobes and bearings.  This way you can get a picture of the cam as viewed from the end, with all lobes shown as they are ground on the cam.  You also can see how the lobes compare to the journals and how the journals look compared to each other (cam bent).  In doing this, the program first asks you to measure the journals lying on the V blocks, or first and last journal on cam if mounting the cam on centers.  This you do with a dial indicator.  Then the program steps you through a sequence of measurements on these journals on the stand.  This way any slight slope of the cam on the stand is corrected for.  After that, you must be careful to not adjust the height of the linear encoder as this will cause errors in height measurements.  This way also allows the CTS (Cam Test Stand) to measure the base circle of each lobe. Figs A45, A46. 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to pick various data types to graph and combine them on 1 graph.  It also includes several new data types for graphing (Figs A47-52), like: 
• 
Absolute Lift (This is lift measured from the center line of the cam.  If you have a 1.100” diameter base circle and a .400” max tappet lift, you should see approximately .550” of lift on base circle and .950” (.550” + .400”) of lift at max lift.)  Figs A47, A48, A49. 

• 
Thrust Angle  (For a roller cam, this is the angle the contact force is acting on the follower, typically putting some amount of side loading or thrust on the follower.) 

• 
Contact Point (How far from center of the follower has the contact point moved.)  Fig A50. 

• 
Radius of Curvature (The radius of curvature at this particular point on the Actual Cam Profile.) 

• 
Raw Cam Data as Measured (This is what the linear encoder measured.) Fig A49. 

• 
Actual Cam Profile (This is what a “knife edge” pointer would have measured.  This is the “Raw Cam Data as Measured” but correcting for the radius of the pointer which was doing the measurements.  This should be what a cam grinder would have for a design file.)  Fig A47. 

• 
Lift Frequency Analysis * 

• 
Acceleration Frequency Analysis (Fig A52). * 

• 
Jerk Frequency Analysis * 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
* These Frequency Analysis graphs can be done either vs Order Number or RPM Based on the Natural Frequency of a valve spring.  The specs for the Natural Frequency of the Valve Spring are contained in the Test/Cam Setup Screen. See Appendix 7 for more details on this Frequency Analysis, FFT Analysis. 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to import X and Y data or Polar coordinates of degrees and radius to generate a cam profile.  This is done by clicking on the Tappet Lift title column.  Then the Edit Test Data screen opens up and there are new Advanced Import Features with several options.  Figs A53, A54.   
The Cam Grinder version of the program lets you enter valve spring info to estimate the spring’s natural frequency.  This allows Frequency Analysis graphs to be graphed vs Engine RPM rather frequency order number.  Fig A52 and Appendix 7. 
Program has an "Export Manufacturing Style Cam File".  Two basic formats are currently available, P File and X,Y Data.  Fig A55. 
Program has an “Export Graph Data as File” option, so you can export any data you can graph as a comma separated text (ASCII) data file. If you click on this option, the program will ask for a file name.  If you give it a .csv extension, it will open directly in Microsoft Excel.  Fig A50. 
Program has an Edit option of “Cut and Append”.  Say you have recorded 360 degrees of data (typical for a “Measured with Electronics” file), but the data starts right at the opening ramp.  You would like to have the data start about 100 degrees before the opening ramp.  You could use this command to take copy the last 100 data points and put them before the opening ramp.  When done, it would appear that you started recording the data 100 deg earlier.  (Typically this is only needed for fixing mistakes, or working with VERY unusual cams like the Ducati desmodromic cam.) 
You can now select for a variable amount of Filtering (smoothing) the cam lift data when exporting cam files (None, Some, Medium, Heavy).  (This is not allowed for cam files exporting “Raw” data.) 
Major New Features for v4.0 Plus Version (also in Cam Grinder Version): 
The program can now use most any radius pointer for measuring a cam for doing the Virtual Follower analysis.  This means that you could measure a cam with the .750" diameter Universal Roller and then correct to what it would be with a .800", or .700" diameter roller.  You can also correct to something really different, like the exact cam profile as ground, like you were measuring the cam with a "knife edge" pointer.  An additional advantage of using a follower instead of the encoder probe directly is no side loading is put on the encoder probe, thus avoiding possible damage.  Figs A44A, A56. 
The Virtual Follower screen can now be enlarged for analysis in greater detail.  Fig A56. 
You now have 2 options for Analyze option at the graph screen:  Just show 'the max difference between lobes, or show the difference between the lobes at all data points.   
Now the program draws the actual profile lift (like the profile was measured with a “knife edge” pointer) on the Virtual Follower screen, in addition to follower lift.  The program draws this in green and made the text boxes green which relate to this measurement.  Fig A56. 
Cam Card now has options for printing, printer setup, including a lobe from a different file for either an intake or exhaust lobe if the cam you are currently reporting has only Intake or Exhaust lobes, or including the Company Logo graphics file on the card.  Fig A57. 
Program now has a “Filtering” option to quickly find files fitting certain criteria.  This would be like finding all files which have “CHEV” in the file name or the comments section, or files having the number “346” in the Grind number 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
recorded after a certain date, etc.  Fig A56 and Appendix 8. Seating Velocity report now includes option to estimate the lash point on cams.  Fig A59. The Custom Duration reports now have an option for including asymmetry. 
Major New Features for v4.0 Std Version (also in Plus and Cam Grinder Versions): 
New emailing options have been added in Preferences to work better with most any emailing system, like gmail, yahoo, etc. .  Fig A60. 
Program now has the ability to import just 1 lobe from a single lobe data file, like S96 or Comp Cams format into an existing Cam File.  This allows you to build a cam consisting of and Intake and Exhaust lobe where the lobes can come from 2 different sources (different files and different file formats).  Fig A91. 
When opening files, a new option has been added of "List by Date File was Last Saved".  This lets you more quickly find files you have recently changed or worked with. 
Program will now allow direct conversion from most any type of data to 'Measured with Electronics' in a 2 step process.  This conversion is necessary to allow you to do more advanced analysis of cam data. 
Minor Changes/Bug Fixes for v4.0: 
Added a Preference under the Calculations tab so you can change the lash the program assumes for doing Valve Lift, Acceleration, Velocity, etc graphs and reports.  Note that the Cam Card always assumes .006 inches for doing Advertised duration and events.   
You can now select 'Some' for 'Lift Filtering' for making a Graph or Report for most all cam files EXCEPT those Measured with Electronics or Created from Simple Specs. This was what was done prior to v4.0.  Now you have an additional option of 'Some (including meas. w elec.)' so that you can do further smoothing of the recorded lift data.  This can be especially useful when creating certain special graphs, like Simulating the Actual Cam Profile when it was measured with the pointer or a roller of a certain diameter.   
Fixed bug where conversion to 'Measured by Hand' was not done correctly if you asked for it almost immediately after opening 
up the program. Program now keeps ALL cam file data points imported from Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, etc for Plus or Cam Grinder versions.  Limit for std version is still data points with .0015” lift or greater. 
Program now correctly keeps cam Centerlines, Advance, etc when you import Cam Dr files when you ask to keep ALL timing events. Printed graphs have been improved.  Previously there could be a “broken” border on the left side. Fixed some bugs where doing graphs where extra lobes could be included in a graph which were not requested.   
Fixed a bug where a graph may not be updated correctly if you did not go back through the Graph Specs screen. Program now does not do additional smoothing to lift curve if data is from a computer generated file.  This is to save considerable calculation time. 
Company Logo now appears on the main screen.  Plus and “Cam Grinder” Version Only.  Fig A44B. Printouts have been refined to look better with various screen resolutions and operating systems.  The program now better imports certain data files which may have been stored in different units than what the program is set up 
for, inches vs mm. Fixed bug where Intro Help Messages would cause the first graph open when starting program to possibly be bad.   Added more Cam Layout templates, 240/300 Ford 6 cylinder, 170/200 Ford 6 cylinder, 250/292 Chevy 6 cylinder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
The program now looks for lift points greater than 10 inches when reading in Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, etc cam files and edits them out.  This can occasionally happen and is likely caused from the imported file being slightly corrupted, or being a slightly different version than we have encountered before. 
Fixed a minor bug where the graph on the main screen may not completely show all lobes. 
Fixed a bug where the graph screen could be significantly more narrow than what was available on the screen.   
In the Plus and Cam Grinder versions, now you can Advance or Retard the cam degree wheel readings by up to 360 degrees under the Edit options.  If you do this command more than once, you can advance or retard readings even more.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A44B “Cam Grinder” Timing Option to show Absolute Timing of Lobes  
You must first turn on this Preference to see options shown to the right. This is to prevent mistakes and unusual results which are possible if you don’t understand these options. 
Cam Grinder timing is shown below. “Typical” timing is when all intake and exhaust lobes lie on top of each other. 
Choose this option to measure Absolute Lift (base circle) and journal diameters. Fig A45 shows procedure to measure Absolute Lift and Journal Diameters. 
Company Logo on Main Screen 
Graph produced when data is graphed without correcting for lifter bore angles or firing order. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A45 Procedure to Measure Absolute Lift of Lobes and Journals 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A46 Procedure to Measure Absolute Lift of Lobes and Journals, cont. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A47 New “Cam Grinder” Graph Options and Graph Data 
Some graph types are only available if the cam was “Measure Absolute Lift of Lobes and Journals”, like this one “Cam Journals and Lobes”. This special Data Type choice will graph the “Actual Cam Profile” data type with the actual journal “lift” (journal radius). 
NOTE: Even if the cam was not measured this way, the data types are still listed here. If you select those data types or options, the program can produce unusual results or warning messages. The results will be SO obviously unusual, that you will definitely realize there is a problem. 
Depending on your choice of Data Types from the list, some of the “Details” options will be enabled here. 
This is the graph produced by choosing “Cam Journals and Lobes” for the Data Type and choosing “Yes” for “Show End View of Cam”. This is the program’s picture of what the cam looks like when viewed from the end of the cam and can be very useful for many different applications. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 





Figure A50 New “Cam Grinder” Graph Options and Graph Data, cont. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A51 New “Cam Grinder” Graph Options and Graph Data, cont. 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Figure A53 New “Cam Grinder” Edit Feature to Copy X/Y or Deg/Lift Data 
This figure shows how you can edit an existing data file.  You can also “edit” a NEW file which was created by clicking on “File”, then one of the “New” options. 
The “Copy/Delete/Paste Tappet Lifts” edit option is very powerful. If you click on it, you may be given the warning message below. 
The only “Type of Cam Data” which can be manually edited is “Measured by Hand”. This particular cam file is currently shown as “Type of Cam Data” as “Measured with Electronics”. Therefore a conversion must be made before it can be edited. 
If you click on Test Options at the top of the main screen, this Test Options screen shows the “Type of Cam Data” is “Measured with Electronics”.  Click on this drop down and choose “Measured by Hand” as shown in the lower left corner. 
Once you do this, the program will show the message to the upper right, and you will have to confirm you really want to make this change.  To be safe, you may want to save your file to a different name first (File, then Save As) so you can return to your data before you make this significant change. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A56 New Virtual Follower Features 
You can pick from 2 standard radius pointers, or type in most any radius. For example, if you measured the cam with a .800” diameter roller (.400” radius), you would enter .400 here. Then you could specify a different Follower Roller Diameter on this screen and see how the actual valve lift curve changes. 
You can now resize or Maximize this screen to take advantage of screens with high resolution. 
Green color shows lift on cam actual profile (as compared to lift at contact point) Contact Patch 
Thrust Angle 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 






Figure A61 Importing File for Just 1 Lobe, to Combine with Existing Cam File 
Click on File, then Open (from all saved tests) to bring up this screen. From here click on the file you want to open. If this file is a computer file but not a Cam Analyzer file, you will bring up the Cam File Options screen below. 
If you have a Cam File (like a Cam Pro Plus, Comp Cams, S96, Andrews, etc), you can copy it into most any folder under the Cam Analyzer’s CAMDATA folder. Then you can find it with this screen. You can also click on the Advanced button to lower left and browse your entire computer. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 


Appendix 7: FFT Analysis in v4.0 
The Cam Grinder version of the program now allows you to pick various data types to graph.  These include: 
• 
Lift Frequency Analysis * 

• 
Acceleration Frequency Analysis * 

• 
Jerk Frequency Analysis * 


This Frequency Analysis is performed by doing a FFT (Fast Fourier Transformation) on the Lift, Acceleration or Jerk curves.  The theory behind Fourier Transformation is that any repetitive wave form can be represented by some combination of mathematical sine waves.  The repetitive wave form for cam analysis is the cam lift curve occurs every 360 degrees of camshaft rotation.  FFT is a mathematical method to determine what major frequency components (sine waves) make the cam lift profile.   
Cam analysis work has been done to determine that if major frequencies in the Valve Acceleration curve exist at low enough frequencies, and if these frequencies match up to the natural frequency of the valve spring, spring surge problems can occur.  Think of an “out of balance” tire on your car.  If you drive at 60 MPH, you may not notice the imbalance at all, but drive at 70 and you can barely hold on to the steering wheel.  At 70 MPH you have hit one of the natural frequencies of the suspension system, which is being excited by the natural frequency of the tire.  At 60 MPH, the frequency may be 5.4 Hz and 70 MPH may be 6.3 Hz (cycles per second) depending on tire size. 
The same is true of the valve train.  If the natural frequency of the primary valve spring is 300 Hz and a large frequency component of the valve acceleration profile match up, then spring surge may occur.  When this occurs, just like the steering wheel wants to jump out of your hand, the valve spring and valve train are very hard to control.  If possibly, you want to avoid RPMs which produce acceleration frequencies which are close to the natural frequency of the valve spring. 
Don Hubbard, previously of Crane Cams, in his outstanding book “Camshaft Reference Handbook” has developed some limits which should be avoided for various valve train design.  These are: 
Limit  Valve Train Type  
.22  Direct acting OHC (overhead cam) buckets valve trains  
.18  OHC rocker arm valve trains  
.12  Pushrod/rocker arm valve trains  

The program offers to do FFT analysis of the Lift and Jerk data as well.  However, we don’t know of any limits which have been developed for FFT analysis of these curves.  You should get a copy of Don’s book for more details.   
The procedure to do this analysis are outlined in Figure A62, and include: 
• 
Obtain a cam file and convert to “Measured with Electronics”.  If you measure with our Cam Test Stand, this happens automatically. 

• 
Enter data for the Primary Valve Springs, which is typically the largest spring (outer spring) in a valve spring pack via the Cam/Test Setup screen. 

• 
Set a description for the Valve Train Type in the Primary Valve Spring screens also. 

• 
Request the Valve Accel Frequencies Data Type and set Graph vs Nat. Freq. RPM to Yes. 

• 
Make a graph and find the lowest frequency RPM which goes above the limit set for the valve train type.  The frequency RPM below this is the safe RPM limit for this particular valve lift profile with these valve springs.  


IMPORTANT: This analysis is done on the Valve Acceleration curve.  Therefore it will change depending on the Rocker Arm Ratio and Lash you enter into the Cam/Test Setup screen. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Appendix 8 Filter Test Files (Plus Version Only) 
The v4.0 Cam Analyzer has a powerful way to search for tests in the Test Library called the Filter Option.  Click on the Filter button in the Open Test File menu (Figure A58) to be presented with the screen shown below. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2012 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
The Filter Feature is very useful for finding a specific test or to find all the tests which meet a certain set of conditions. For example, say you want to find a test that Operator “Jack” ran for Customer “Smith” on a “Big Block Chevy” cam.  Or, say you want to check on all tests run with 1.5 intake rocker arms, where “1.5” would be in the “Intake Rocker Arm” field in the Test Conditions screen.  Or perhaps you want to find all Crower cams that “Jeff” measured . In all these cases, the filtering specs would allow you to find the test files. 
First you must select the condition you want to look for by clicking on the down arrow button on the 'This comment or spec' box. Your choice of this spec will determine what the 'Has this relationship' options are, and what specs can be entered in the 'To what I enter here' spec. 
You can select up to 3 conditions to look for.  For the Operator “Jack”, Customer “Johnson”, “Big Block Chevy” example above, you would need to search for 3 conditions.  For the “1.5” intake rocker arm example, you could just search for 1 condition. You add conditions by checking the 'Include this condition also' box. This enables the other specs for each condition. 
If more than 1 condition is being used for the search, you must determine if you want the search to include tests which fit ANY of the conditions (Or) or must match ALL conditions (And).  For example, if you are looking for tests run by either Operator Jack or Operator Joe, you would select “Or”.  If you want Tests which made more than 1.5 intake rocker arm ratio and were done since Jan 2012 (the tests must match both conditions), you would select “And”. 
The 3 command buttons will do the following: 
Show Files Only Fitting These Conditions will return you to the Open Test File screen.  Only files fitting these conditions will be displayed (which may be no files in some situations).  You can click on various folders (or whatever name you have given to folders in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen) to see if there are any matches in other folders. 
Turn Off Filtering (show all files) will return you to the Open Test File screen and now all files will be displayed. 
Print List of All Files Fitting These Conditions will search through the entire Test Library (all folders in the CAMDATA folder) for files matching these conditions and display them in a new screen.  From this screen, you can also print the list.  This is the quickest way to see which folders may contain test files matching your conditions. 

Tip:  When looking for a word, the program doesn’t care if it is in CAPITAL (upper case) or small (lower case) letters. In Figure A64 above you are looking for the word BowTie in the test comments.  The program will display all files which have the word “BowTie” or the word “BOWTIE” or the word “bowtie” or the word “BowTIE” anywhere in the comments.  The program will not find files with the words “Bow Tie” (with a space between Bow and Tie) .  Therefore, it may be smarter to just look for the word “bow” to avoid this problem.  Note, however, that if you do this, the program will also find tests with the word “elbow”  or “crossbow” , for example, in the test comments. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 9: New Features in v4.3 
Cam Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.0 for Windows. These include 3.2A (Appendix 3), 3.2B (Appendix 4), v3.8 (Appendix 5), v4.0 (Appendix 6) and now v4.3.  Here is a listing of some of the new features for Version 4.3: 
Cam Analyzer v4.3 actually has 5 different versions, which include: 
• 
Cam Analyzer Basic (for analyzing cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus  (for more detailed analyzing of cam data from either manual data entry or computer cam files) 

• 
Cam Analyzer Basic for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand (CTS) sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors 

• 
Cam Analyzer Plus for use with the electronic Cam Test Stand sensors, with advanced “Cam Grinder” features 


Note that some of these new features apply only to the Plus Version and/or “Cam Grinder” version of the software.  Also note that the “Cam Grinder” version contains all Plus Version features. 
New Features for the “Cam Grinder” Version Only: 
We’ve added a feature to allow for a Test Piece picture to be included with your test files and printouts.  Program now does not 
print pictures if either the Logo or Test Piece picture file does not exist.  Fig 9.1 and 9.2A. Cam Grinder Version has new options where you can create a Cam Card from separate intake and exhaust files in the special Cam Grinder Timing format.  Cam Grinder Timing files were added in v4.0 and do not force the centerlines to line up from different cylinders.  They do not account for lifter bore angles or firing order effects.  Instead the profiles look much as they would when looking at the end of the cam. 
New Graph and Report option for Cam Grinder, allow for Crank Degrees or Cam Degrees.  If doing Cam Degrees, the program turns Off the Labels of TDC and BDC and always numbers the degrees in reports as numbers, not as a deg wheel.  Fig 9.2. 
In Cam Grinder version, added a new Rezero Rotary Sensor Option in the Record screen.  Fig 9.3. In Cam Grinder version, added a new Rezero Lift Sensor Option in the Record screen to allow you to specify a certain lift value to be for the lift sensor at it's current position.  Fig 9.3. 
Added a new profile type for “Measure with Electronics” of "Measure Anything", for cams which are not typical automotive 
cams.  Fig 9.4. Added a new Graph Type for the Cam Grinder called Overlap Area.  It can be done for either Valve Lift or Tappet Lift.  You must also include both Intake and Exhaust Valve or Tappet Lift graphs for this graph to be produced.  Fig 9.5. 
Program now allows for .csv types of output formats and Blair file formats for Exporting.  Fig 9.6. Crank Degrees can now be shown on the Electronics Recording screen in addition to Cam Degrees.  Fig 9.3. Program has several new features for Exporting Manufacturing Files, including: 
• 
Added special feature for exporting a Master Cam file.  Fig 9.7. 

• 
Added option to export Manufacturing Type file in IGES or IGS format.  Then you can also specify the base circle to .igs files.  Fig 9.9 – Fig 9.11 

• 
Added feature to allow user to zero out runout on measured profile.  If you set this to Yes, the program will find what the program believes to be the start of the opening ramp and end of the closing ramp.  Then whichever lift is higher will be assigned the lift of the base circle of the master cam to be created.  This will eliminate any runout of the measured profile being passed on to the master cam.  The 'downside' of doing this is that if there is a significant difference between lifts at these 2 points (bad runout on measured cam), there could be a discontinuity at start or end of one of the ramps.  Fig 9.9 


Added feature to increase or reduce the lobe durations (stretch or compress duration) by a percentage.  Fig 9.12 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Cam Grinder version lets you manually generate degrees up to 720 degrees.  This can be handy for converting cam files “Measured with Electronics” to “Measured by Hand” so you can do modifications on them. 
The program now allows much larger Roller Follower diameters, to simulate grinding stones on cam grinders. If this is set, duration and events are done in Cam Degrees, the Degree Wheel data on main screen is now labeled "Cam Degrees" if doing Cam Grinder timing.   
Added the ability to read .P files.  Click on File, then Open from All Saved Tests and click on a .P file to open it.   
New Features for the Plus Version Only: 
There is now a Preference setting to let you keep the Graph on the main screen always at the same graph scales.  This can cause problems if you open files for cams with different lifts and durations than you normally run, or the cams you test produce quite different lifts and durations.  However, if your cams are always about the lift and duration, this new Preference makes it easier to spot changes with the graph on the main screen.  Fig 9.13 
Program now states events on the Cam Card are at valve lift if you are using virtual follower rocker arm "Cam on Rocker".   
If you are creating a Cam Card from a file which contains only intake or only exhaust data, but you have already picked a file to be associated with this file for the other lobes data, the program now reminds you of the associated file when you create a cam card. You can also choose to change or cancel the file associated with this file. 
A new Overlap option has been added to the Custom Duration Report.  Fig 9.14 
Two major new Options screen have been added for the Cam Card, including when clicking on the Options button at the lower right:  More Options and Modify Labels.  Fig 9.15. 
The program now displays a graph title on the main screen, stating if the profile is measured with the actual follower, or simulated by Virtual Follower and what type of Virtual Follower.  Fig 9.4. 
The program now saves the current file as a temporary file before making a Cam Card, so that any changes made during creation of the Cam Card can be restored when program returns to the main screen.   
The program now allows a roller follower to be one tenth (0.1) the normal lower limit, which is nearly a "knife edge" for the Virtual Follower simulation.  This way the Cam Lift numbers can be very close to those measured by the actual pointer, or even smaller.   
The powerful “Filter” feature lets you search for files containing particular measurements, or comments, etc.  (See Appendix 8 for more info on this feature.)  Now the list of files fitting a particular “Filter” criteria are displayed in Notepad with better spacing to allow for very long file and folder names when you click "Print list of all files fitting these conditions".  This list now also includes the Cam Number.  Fig 9.16 
. 
New Features for All Versions: 
You can now request what to use for "Lift for Rating Events", either .050" .040" (1 mm) or .053" (for Harley Davidson).  Added 
Rated Lift to History Log, and better arranged spacing of History Log columns for information they must contain.  Fig 9.17. The new Mini USB is a possible logger type.  Right now this is just a direct replacement of the current Black Box II.  In the future we may add more features. 
Now if you import a cam profile, and the profile has 0.5 deg increments and more than 400 rows of data, the program checks to see if the first row has a whole degree increment like 0.0, 1.0, 2.0, etc or half degree 0.5, 1.5, etc.  The program will use the rows where there are whole degree increments.   
Replaced "Copy" with "Copy (or Merge)" to list of Folder Options possible in 'Save As' screen.  Fig 9.18. Program now explains why changes in 'Starting a New Test' screen are not saved if you don't start a new test.  Added features so program can check after writing the config file if it is corrupt and whether a backup should be made. A backup file of the config file is now made and used if the main config file has been corrupted.   Form for Starting a New Test now has larger fields for File, Folder, etc names to better display the names completely.  Fig 9.19. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Program now saves tests to My-Tests folder if it's original folder was the Examples folder.  Overwriting a file from the 
Examples folder is not allowed. If you change the printer within the program to something other than the computer's default printer, the program now restores the default printer and printer orientation when it shuts down.   
Program now adjust length of folder and file name in History Log to better fit in available space in the 1st column. You can now import files from the Performance Trends Quick Cam Checker.  You need v1.1 A.015 or later of the Cam 
Checker, which should be a free download on the PerformanceTrends.com website under Downloads.  NOTE:  The precision of these files are not as good as those measured with the Cam Analyzer on our Cam Test Stand.  Fig 9.20 to Fig 9.22. Added several new features to the “Save As” screen so you can see other files in folders and select these file names as the name 
to use or edit to use as a new file name.  It also has simplified the method of creating a new folder, and listing these file names by date or name.  Fig 9.23 Now the browser should be the default on your computer.  Previously it only looked for Internet Explorer.   When you resize the main screen, it is more reliable at refreshing all controls and pictures.   
Program can now better display PDFs in some versions of Windows 10.   Did lots of refinements to the buttons on the Graph screen which let you enlarge or shrink the graph, or shift the graphs left, right, up and down.  Prior to this, the action could get "stuck" or not do the action exactly as expected.   
Program has several refinements for reading CPP files more accurately and reliably. Added new Cam Layout types of "Hemi 99" for race only Mopar, the modern Mopar Hemi 5.7/6.1/6.4L, the GM Gen V LT-4 
2015, and fixed a bug in Pontiac cam design layout.  Cam Layout types are used for data files types of “Measuring with Electronics”.  Fig 9.24. Program now reports significant figures for lift to 5 decimal places.  The measurement resolution of lift sensor is .00004 inches, 
so going to more than 5 decimal places does not produce any more accurate results. Program can now read SVL files (from 4stHEAD program). Program now just displays "Hydraulic" or "Solid" for the Lifter Type for cams that are Measured with Electronics.  Previously 
you could specify various roller or flat Lifter Types, but that did not make sense for cams that are Measured with Electronics. Replaced linear interpolation with curve fitting for exporting cam files for all versions.   Files and folders you delete now are actually sent to the Recycle Bin so they can be recovered later if you want.  Fig 9.25. Program is now better at adding numbers to the end of file names by default. Now when you open a file which has a Graph Name specified in the History Log, that Graph Name stays with the file.  
Previously it was restored to the default File Name as being the Graph Name.   
Program now tells you your specs "MATCH" the master specs.  Before it said "DO MATCH" and many people mistakenly read this as "DO NOT MATCH". Fixed minor bug where if you changed the Graph Name for the first file in the History Log, it would not stay permanently.  Fixed bug where if cam file has only exhaust lobes, you could not open it from the History Log on the main screen.   Refined the program to be better at reading Black Box II when you have selected the Preference of 'Assume Asian Operating 
System'. When converting files between Inches and MM lift, now the program uses more decimal places for all files types for more precise conversions.   
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.2A Print Options for the Test Piece Picture 
Click here in 
Click here in Graph 
Report Screen for
Screen for printing 
printing Test Piece
Test Piece picture 
picture options.
options. 
Options for printing Reports. 
Options for printing Graphs. 
Graph printout with Test Piece Picture with Make Picture Smaller not checked. If in Landscape view, this will work differently. 
Graph printout with Test Piece Picture with Make Picture Smaller checked. If in Landscape view, this will work differently. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.3 Resetting Lift and Degrees in Recording Screen 
New Rezero Options 
Option checked to display Crank Degrees. 
Crank Degrees being Displayed. 
Readings now read as you directed by screens above. This feature is typically only useful for manually finding different things on the stand, like, how much lift on the intake ramp is produced by exactly 10 degrees of rotation. A cam profile measured with these changes will be exactly the same without these changes. However the timing will be changed by the amount you changed the rotary encoder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.4 Measure Anything Option To Measure Unusual Cams 
Cam with unusual profile being measured with special “Precision Tip” Turn this Preference On for “Measure Anything” option. 
Cam Grinder and Plus versions show if lift is simulated by Virtual Follower. 
Choose this type of Lobe 
Because there may not be a normal “base circle” for unusual cams, it is typically best to also set this option for Zero Lift. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 




Figure 9.6 Export File Options for Cam Grinder Only 
Choose this Export Option 
Three new output format types, only available in Cam Grinder version. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.7 Advanced Export Manufacturing File Options 
Choose this Export Type 
Master cam profile. 
“Yes, spec base circle” and you enter the diameter of the base circle when the master is finished. 
“Yes, spec blank OD” and you enter the Outside diameter of the blank that the master will be created from 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
FAQ From Website: How do I create a manufacturing file to exactly copy of a cam lobe I just measured? 
You need the Cam Grinder version of the Cam Analyzer to do this. First you must measure the cam using the Virtual Follower option, available via the "See Virtual Follower Details" button in the Test/Cam Layout screen, as shown in the screen below. 
You can use either the .750" diameter Universal Roller or the linear encoder's standard tip directly on the cam lobe.  The critical specs to set are the Base Circle you will measure from the cam you are measuring, specifying one of the Virtual Follower "Follower Types" (recommend Virtual Roller), and the Probe Radius you are using. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

Then measure the lobe you want to duplicate with the Cam Test Stand.  When you have the lobe measured, click on File at upper left of main screen, the Export Manufacturing Style File from the list. 
In the Export screen which comes up, choose IGS as the file type at top (or one of the others if you are sure you can use that type), the file name, file destination and which Lobe to Use (the one you measured).  Then click on the Make File button.  IGS is the Format recommended because many CAD/CAM programs like SolidWorks and Mastercam will import it directly. 
A portion of the resulting IGS file is shown below in Notepad below. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.12 Edit Feature to Increase or Reduce Duration of a File 
Click Edit, the “Increase or Reduce Durations” 
Note: You can only do this to profiles “Measured by Hand”. You may have to convert a different type of profile (like “Measured with Electronics”) to “Measured by Hand” before doing this edit. Check Appendix 5, Figure A29 which describes converting a file to “Measured with Electronics”. Converting to “Measured by Hand” works similar. 
Profile with Durations increased 10% 
Original Profile 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.13 Preference to Always Use Same Graph Scale on Main Screen 
Turn this Preference to “Use Settings Below” to enable Graph settings. 
Graph on main screen using Preference settings 
If a cam profile does not fit in these settings, it may be cut off the display or be shown very small. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.14 New Overlap Output for Custom Duration Reports 
Choose Custom Duration report and select “Intake & Exhaust” for “Lobes to Report” Choose one of these settings with “Overlap”. 
Click here to bring up screen to the right. 
Overlap shown for the different lifts. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.16 New Features for Filtering (Finding) Files See Appendix 8 for more info on using the Filter feature. 
Click here to find all files meeting your search (find or filter) criteria. 
Search results are now shown in Notepad so you can print, save, or copy them to the clip board. 
The width of these columns adjust to fit whatever width is need to completely show the names. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018  Cam Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure 9.17 Lift for Rating Events  In Test/Cam Setup screen you can now specify what lift should be used for determining events and durations.  

Duration and events for that lift shown on main screen. 
Lift for Rating Events shown here in Test Summary. Test Summaries can be included in printouts. 
Events in History Log are also determined by this “Rated Lift”. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.20 Importing from Cam Checker 
Locate the Cam­Checker.exe program, and click Open button at lower right. Once it is located, the program will remember it. 
Choose this Import option. 
Click here to review this Help Screen again.  
If this current file does not have the profile you want to Import, click on File and open a different file.  

Click on a record (row) which has a Profile File to highlight it. 
Once you have selected a record, click the Graph Profile button. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.21 Importing from Cam Checker, cont 
Once the profile is graphed, click this button. 
The Cam Checker software will close and you can click this button once you are back at the Cam Analyzer. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 9.22 Importing from Cam Checker, cont 
After clicking on OK on the Cam Analyzer messages, enter a name for saving the data Imported from the Cam Checker. 
You can also choose a folder or choose to add a New Folder. 
Cam Analyzer with new Imported Cam Checker data and file name. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018  Cam Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure 9.23 New “Save As” Features  
Click on File, then Save As  

Click this Check Box for new info and options. Many times you may want to see what other files are in this same folder, or use one of these file names as the New Test Name, or possibly modify that name slightly. 
Here we are listing Test Files alphabetically by name. 
Using the Picked  
Choose a Test name from  name and then  
the list, then click here to  modifying it slightly.  
copy that name to the New  
Test Name field.  

Listing by Date 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 



Figure 9.25 Saving Deleted Files and Folders to Recycle Bin 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Cam Analyzer Appendices 
Circle Track Analyzer v4.0 for Windows 
User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48152 248-473-9230 Fax 248-442-7750 
www.performancetrends.com 
Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Performance Trends, Inc. PO Box 530164, Livonia, MI 48152 Sales & Tech Help for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230  Fax: 248-442-7750 Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice Copyright (C) 2020 Performance Trends, Inc.  All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by Performance Trends, Inc. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp.  1993 All Rights Reserved 
International Business Machines Corp. makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, regarding the enclosed computer package, its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.   IBM PC, XT, and AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp. MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. 
DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION OF FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE OF SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY OF OBLIGATION OF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES.  PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
Continued on next page. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS OF PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS OF ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
********************************** W A R N I N G  *********************************** The Circle Track Analyzer makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with engines and vehicles.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-Obtaining data to input to the program
 -Interpreting the program's results Before making measurements of or modifications to any vehicle, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO:
 -Regard the safety consequences 
-Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 
-Read the entire user's manual 
-Obey all federal, state & local laws 
-Respect the rights and safety of others 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Overview of Features 1 
1.2 Before You Start 2 
1.3 A Word of Caution 3 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 4 
   1.5 Example to Get You Going                                 5 
Chapter 2 Definitions 9 
2.0 Basic Program Operation 9 2.1 Preferences 11 2.2 Engine 12 
2.3 Vehicle Specs 17 
2.4 Front Suspension Specs 23 
2.5 Rear Suspension Specs 37 
2.6 Calculated Lap Times (Performance) 45 
2.6.1 Running Conditions 45 
2.6.2 Calculate Performance Test Results 49 
2.7 Calculation Menus 53 
2.8 Match My Lap Times 67 
Chapter 3 Output 69 
3.0 Test Results       69 3.1 Analyze Perf. Reports 71 3.2 Graphs 73 3.3 Vehicle (& File) Library 81 3.4 Printer Output 85 3.5 History Log 87 3.6 Analyze Suspension 89 
Chapter 4 Examples 95 
Example 4.1 Changing Axle Ratio 97 
Example 4.2 Calibrating Circle Track Analyzer for Your Car 105 
Example 4.3 Analyzing the Front Suspension 117 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
Appendix 2: General Tips 131 Appendix 3: New Features in v3.2 135 Appendix 4: New Features in v3.5 141 Appendix 5: New Features in v3.6 151 Appendix 6: New Features in v4.0 159 Index 187 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features 
The Circle Track Analyzer program by Performance Trends, Inc. is a software system to let circle track racers, performance enthusiasts, and even the average driver understand and predict many aspects circle track racing and vehicle handling.  The Circle Track Analyzer, Version 2 has been designed to be easier, faster and more accurate.  Several new features have been added and other features enhanced. The major changes in Circle Track Analyzer Version 2 are listed below: 
New Features: 
• 
Mouse driven user interface compatible with Windows 98 through Vista for easier operation and better print capability. 

• 
Improved Front Suspension layout screen, very similar to our popular Roll Center Calculator. 

• 
Rear Suspension layout screen, for simple analysis of rear suspensions. 

• 
Improved suspension and analysis screen to watch front suspension motion while traveling around the track. 

• 
Feature to automatically pick the best gear at a particular track. 

• 
Feature which allows the program to adjust critical specs to best match your lap times and highest and lowest vehicle RPMs at a particular track. 

• 
Can print most menus and calculation menus separately. 

• 
Keeps log of last 25 tests run, for comparison or recall.  You can also select to save up to 10 of these tests for as long as you wish.  You can also select to graph up to 5 of these tests with the current results. 

• 
Advanced file Open and Save commands let you access any drive or directory with standard Windows File Dialog menu. 

• 
Better printing of reports. 

• 
Ability to graph the results.  These graphs include many options like zoom, shift, line styles, etc. 

• 
On screen help by simply clicking on any input spec. 


If you require more detailed analysis or more features, you may need our upcoming Circle Track Analyzer "Pro".  
Check Appendices 3-6, pages 135-185 for Features added in Versions 3.2, 3.5, 3.6 and 4.0. 
Also, v4.0 can be “unlocked” into 4 different versions, just Roll Center Calculator v4.0 (front suspension only), just Roll Center Calculator Plus v4.0 (front and rear suspension), the Circle Track Analyzer v4.0, and Circle Track Analyzer “Plus” v4.0. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
Approximately 20 Megabyte of disk space. 

• 
Windows XP, Vista, Windows 7, 8 and 10 

• 
Printer (optional). 


Many terms used by the Circle Track Analyzer and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, like Roll Center, Tire Traction Factor, etc. However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Circle Track Analyzer. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Circle Track Analyzer directory or folder.   
To read this file, use Windows Explorer to find the Circle Track Analyzer directory, usually CTA20 under PERFTRNS.PTI.  Then double click on README.DOC. Wordpad will display the contents. 
A new feature has been added to read the README.DOC file from inside the Circle Track Analyzer program.  At the main screen, click on Help from the Menu bar, then select “View README.DOC File”. 
Every effort has been made by Performance Trends, Inc to provide you with an accurate, cost saving, high quality tool at a very reasonable price.  We do not copy protect our software, to allow our customers full freedom to make back-up copies for their own personal use. Please respect the programmer's copyright and do NOT give out copies to your friends.    
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
The Circle Track Analyzer is a comprehensive software package which estimates a vehicle's performance based on limited user input.  These estimates can be used for analysis of circle track performance.  A vehicle is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible.  Therefore, several simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level.  See the Assumptions in Appendix 1.  The user must recognize: 
The software can not predict the safety of a vehicle modification or driving situation.  Done correctly, with the proper quality parts and safety precautions, extreme vehicle conditions can be safe.  Done by inexperienced racers with standard or low quality parts, a race car can be a "disaster waiting to happen". Please read and follow the "Safety Notes" as highlighted in this manual. 
The software, like any computer model, can NOT make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software is estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions within the program will limit the accuracy. 

• 
Environmental conditions, driver performance, track conditions, etc. are rarely constant and repeatable. 

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help you understand how an vehicle works; what parameters are important, how parameters interact, what are the tradeoffs, etc. 

• 
Point you in the correct, general direction for making modifications. This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, race results, books, etc. Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense to you. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all your data input. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Computer programs are written by normal people who can make mistakes.  It's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your phone call may help us correct it.) 


Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Circle Track Analyzer from the distribution CD.  To do this, simply place the CD in the CD drive and it will auto-start the Performance Trends Installation Wizard.  From this Wizard, you can select to install any of our products as demos, or the Circle Track Analyzer (which is not a demo).  The button to install Circle Track Analyzer will be highlighted, probably in the color green.  Just click on this button to start the installation, then follow the instructions in the installation program. 

For most users, just click on OK for each question asked to accept the default answers suggested by the Installation program.  Once you have installed the Circle Track Analyzer, there should be a Circle Track Analyzer icon on your desktop for you to click on. Otherwise, use Windows Explorer to find the CTA20 folder (directory) under the PERFTRNS.PTI folder (directory) and click on the CTA.EXE program.  (Version 3.6 is installed in the C:\Program Files\Performance Trends\Circle Track Analyzer v3.6 folder.) 
Entering Registered Owner's Name: 
During your first setup, the Circle Track Analyzer will ask you to enter your name as the Registered Owner. During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied. Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card. 
Click on About in the Main Menu to review your name and code # . 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Circle Track Analyzer from Windows 3.1, click on the Circle Track Analyzer icon in the Perf.Trnds program group.  From Windows 95 or 98, click on Start, then Programs, then Perf. Trends, and then Circle Track Analyzer.  After some brief introduction screens, you will be left at the Main Menu shown below. 

From this main menu, you can:                                            
• 
Choose to review or modify any of the categories of vehicle specifications displayed. 

• 
Open or Save a file of complete vehicle specifications by clicking on the Open or Save buttons (first 2 buttons on the left) or the File menu item, then either Open or Save. 

• 
Add, edit or review vehicle comments to describe the vehicle currently held in the program.   

• 
Calculate vehicle performance from the options listed under Running Conditions.  From here you can specify calculation options (weather conditions, track specs, driver types, etc.). 

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for you. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help or pressing <F1>. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit, or click on the Quit button. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
In the Main Menu’s blue title bar you will notice the current Vehicle is [LATEMODL].  The program has descriptions of vehicles saved in the Library right from the factory.  The current file from the Vehicle Library is called LATEMODL.  
To get started, let's examine (but not change) the various categories of specs.  Click on a button for one of the categories like Engine, Vehicle, etc.  A new menu will appear displaying the various specs and the current values for the LATEMODL vehicle.  You can click on the name of any spec and a brief description appears in the Help frame, along with a page #  from this manual for more help.  You can return to the Main Menu by clicking on OK or clicking on an area outside this menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

Now click on the Calculate Performance button in the Main Menu to calculate performance for this LATEMODL vehicle.  The next menu will show you the Calculate Performance Conditions menu as shown in Figure 1.2. 

For now, leave all the Calculation Conditions as they are and click on the Calculate Performance button.  This will start the program calculating performance for the specifications of the LATEMODL stored in the Vehicle Library with the Calculation Conditions currently displayed.  A progress bar graph shows how the calculations are progressing.  The calculations may require several seconds on slower computers.   
The final results will appear in a table as in Figure 1.3.  The columns are for various types of readings (Time, MPH, etc) which occurred at even time intervals during the run.  The results contain much information, some which may not be familiar to you. However, if you look at the Results Summary in the upper right corner, you see a lap time of 16.12 seconds with an average speed of 
83.7 MPH.  These are results you do understand. 
If you click on the slide bar button identified in Figure 1.3, and slide the results down to the last row of results, you see a time 8.06 seconds, exactly half of the Lap Time of 
16.12 seconds. That is because the program only calculates half of a lap, from turn 2 through the straight through turn 3.  The program then assumes the other half lap would be exactly the same and just doubles the time for half a lap. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
The menu bar and the command buttons at the top of the screen shows some of the options for various formats for data output: 
• 
Analyze Perf will produce a report of performance and safety tips on the test results 

• 
Analyze Suspension will show the car traveling around the track and how the corner weights and front suspension members are changing. 

• 
Graph will produce various types of graphs. You can also compare the current results to results of the previous run, or some other Baseline you have saved. 

• 
Print lets you print these results on your printer. 


If you have a printer hooked up to your computer, try the Print command by clicking on Print in the menu bar or on the Printer button. A small menu of printout options are presented.  These options allow you to enter a report comment, include vehicle specs and comments in the printout, etc.  These options are explained in Section 3.4.  For this first time, accept the default settings and print the report by clicking on Print Results. 
To help explain the other columns of output, simply click on those results.  A definition of that particular data will be presented in a Message box as in Figure 1.4. Then click on OK when you have read the definition. 
Figure 1.4, Calculated Results with Help Definition 

Click here or press the F1 key for general help on what your options are at this point in the program. 
By clicking on a number in the results, an explanation and definition is given, including a page number in this manual for more information. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

For a detailed explanation of all the results, Calculation Conditions, and output options, go to Section 2.6 and Chapter 3. 
Clicking on Back or pressing the <ESC> key will return you to the Main Menu.  From the Main Menu you can modify the LATEMODL to see the effect on performance.  For example you could go into any of the component menus and: 
• 
Change to a different rear axle ratio. 

• 
Install ‘stickier’ tires. 

• 
Change weather or driving conditions. 


The beauty of the program is that it repeats exactly each time.  This lets you find differences which would be “clouded” by changes in track conditions or driver variations. 
Many of the input specifications you see in the various menus may not be familiar to you.  For a brief definition of the inputs, simply click on the specification name.  The definition will appear in the Help frame with a page # in this manual for more info. 
Some of the vehicle specifications have “Clc” buttons.  One example is Dew Point in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu. “Clc” stands for "calculate". For example, if you want to calculate the Dew Point from wet and dry bulb readings, simply click on the Clc button. The program will display a new menu listing the inputs and the Calc Dew Point from these inputs.  For further explanation, click on the Help buttons in these menus. To use the Calc Dew Point calculated from these inputs, click on the Use Calc Value button.  Otherwise click on Cancel to return to the Calculate Performance Conditions menu with no change to Dew Point.  Section 2.8, Calculation Menus explains all these calculations. 
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various performance calculations, read Section 
3.3 of this manual called Vehicle Library to learn how to save a set of vehicle specifications or recall information which has been previously saved. Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Figure 2.1 shows the Circle Track Analyzer’s Main Menu with explanations of your options here.   

v4.0 can be “unlocked” into 4 different versions, just Roll Center Calculator v4.0 (front suspension only), just Roll Center Calculator Plus v4.0 (front and rear suspension), the Circle Track Analyzer v4.0, and Circle Track Analyzer “Plus” v4.0.  This can significantly change the appearance of the Main Screen.  Check Appendix 5 and 6, pages 151-185. 
Figure 2.2 shows the Engine menu with explanations of options for most component menus. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Figure 2.2 Explanation of Sections of Typical Menu 
Name of specs. Click on them for a description in the menu’s help frame. 
Help frame giving definition of spec and page # in manual for more info. Drop down combo box. Click on down arrow button on the right side to pick from a list of possible choices for this spec. 
Standard text entry box where you can type in the value of 
the spec (which will be checked against acceptable limits). Calculation button which opens up another menu where you can calculate the value of a spec from other inputs 
Click on commands in the menu bar to: 

• 
Exit this menu 

• 
Open (retrieve) a set of example engine specs provided by Performance Trends, or a set of specs you have previously saved. 

• 
Print this screen. 

• 
Import an Engine Analyzer power curve. 

• 
Display the Engine Comments with other comments describing this vehicle and front & rear suspension. 

• 
Calculate a power curve from simple inputs. 

• 
Obtain further help on this screen. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.1 Preferences 

Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Menu screen to drop down the Preferences shown in Figure 2.3.  Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. 
Beginner/Experienced Level 
If you select Beginner, the program will lock out the more complicated features, make more checks on specs assuming you could be making mistakes, and gives more explanation before an action is performed (assuming you may not be familiar it).  We strongly recommend this choice to anyone new to computers or this program. 
Engine Graph - Thick Lines Engine Graph - Thin Lines 
Lets you customize the way the Full Power Curve graph in the Engine specs menu is displayed and printed. 
Restart Displaying Help Tips 
You will notice several tips displayed during running the program, many with a Check Box which says “Don’t Show This Again”.  Once you are aware of a tip, you do not want to be shown it again, so click on this check box to “X” it, then click on OK. 
If you ever want to review a tip, click on this menu item, and all tips will be displayed again at the appropriate time in the program, just as when the program was new, before you  checked “Don’t Show This Again”. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

2.2 Engine 
The Engine specs describe the engine's size in cubic inches, its torque and HP, and what power correction was used for rating the engine’s torque and HP. 
Figure 2.4 Engine Specs Menu (shown with Full Power Curve) Click on File, then: 
• 
New to blank out the power curve table. 

• 
Open Example to pick an example engine provided with the program. 

• 
Save to save these engine specs to a name of your choosing. 

• 
Print or Windows Printer Setup to print this screen. 

• 
here to set the amount of detail you want to give the program about the power curve 



Name of current set of Engine Specs. You give the specs a name when you save then 
Torque and HP graph based on data in table below it. Note that HP has a separate scale on the right side. 
Click here to load a power curve from an Engine Analyzer program 
Click here or here to calculate power curve specs from other simple inputs. 
Displacement, cu in 
The engine’s cubic inch displacement is used to estimate the amount of rotating inertia * in the engine and clutch/flywheel or converter. Because this spec has a Clc button, Displacement can be calculated from other inputs.  See Section 2.7.2. The bigger the cubic inches, the larger the assumed rotating inertia. 
* Definition of Engine Inertia:  The engine inertia is a measure of how massive the engine's rotating components are and how difficult it is to accelerate or decelerate the engine itself.  Most of the engine's inertia is contained in the flywheel/clutch assembly for a manual transmission, or in the torque converter for an automatic transmission.  The more massive or the larger the diameter the flywheel or any rotating engine component, the larger the inertia value. 
Under this input, the engine’s displacement is shown for CCs and Liters. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Clutch 
Click on the down arrow button to pick a general description of the clutch and flywheel used with this engine.  This choice will only affect the rotating Engine Inertia the program assumes.  The larger the clutch and flywheel, the more the engine inertia.  See Displacement above. 
Power Curve Data 
There are several ways to load in RPM, torque and HP data into the table on the right side of the Engine menu.  You can: 
• 
Pick an Example dyno curve supplied by Performance Trends by clicking on File, the Open Example Engine. 

• 
Pick a set of specs you have previously saved by clicking on File, the Open Saved Engine. 

• 
Calculate one based on simple inputs by clicking on Calculate in the Menu at the top. 

• 
Load an Example curve, you can load a curve calculated from one of our Windows Engine Analyzer Programs 

• 
Simply type in readings as from a dyno curve.  If you type in readings, as soon as there 2 readings for any set of 3 inputs, the 3rd one is automatically calculated and filled in, and the new point is added to the graph. 


The graph always shows a sharp drop in power after the highest RPM point in the table.  This is to remind you that this is what the program assumes for calculations, that engine power drops significantly (like it ran into an overspeed) after the highest RPM. If you want the power to not drop so suddenly, then you must add an additional RPM above your current highest RPM, and enter a HP reading which draws the curve like you expect it to look. 
The Circle Track Analyzer assumes all torque and HP numbers entered are recorded at a steady RPM (not accelerating) and corrected to the aftermarket dynamometer standard correction factor.  Dynamometers which mostly test racing engines (typical of magazine articles and aftermarket testing companies) generally correct their data to 29.92" Hg, 60 degrees F and approximately 0 degrees F dew point (no humidity). 
Menu Commands 
The menu bar at the top provides for several command options, some which are fairly self explanatory: 
• 
Back returns you to the main menu. 

• 
File opens up several typical Windows options: 

• 
New will blank out all the RPM, torque and HP entries, Displacement, Clutch Type, Engine Comments; and the Engine File name will be called “Untitled”. 

• 
Open Example Engine File will open a typical Circle Track Analyzer “File Open” menu, where you can pick a set of example Engine Specs loaded by Performance Trends. 

• 
Open Saved Engine File will open a typical Circle Track Analyzer “File Open” menu, where you can pick a set of Engine Specs which you have saved, using the Save command in this menu. 

• 
Save Engine File will open a typical Circle Track Analyzer “File Save” menu, where you can save the current set of Engine Specs and Engine Comments under a name of your choosing.  This name then appears at the top of the Engine Specs menu.  This name should not be confused with the Vehicle Name which appears at the top of the main screen.  The Vehicle Name includes the engine specs, and therefore the Engine Name. 

• 
Print lets you print this screen. 

• 
Windows Printer Setup lets you change printer selection, paper orientation, etc. 

• 
Calculate will calculate a power curve from simple inputs.  See Section 2.7.1 on this Calculation Menu. 

• 
The Load from Engine Analyzer command will be discussed in more detail below. 

• 
Help brings up a series of help screens on the Engine Specs menu. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Load from Engine Analyzer 
The Circle Track Analyzer can load engine power curves created by the proper Windows versions of Engine Analyzer EZ, the standard Engine Analyzer, and Engine Analyzer Pro. 
Generally you will start this process by running the Engine Analyzer program first.  Once the Calculated Performance results have been calculated and displayed on the screen, click on the Send button in the Engine Analyzer. This Engine Analyzer menu looks similar to Figure 2.5.  It will ask what program do you want to send the power curve to, where you could click the Circle Track Analyzer option.  There are other options which you can refer to your Engine Analyzer manual. 
The process of loading Engine Analyzer results into Circle Track Analyzer is nearly automatic and consists of: 
1. 
Once you’ve selected the Circle Track Analyzer as the program to Send the results to, click on  the OK/Send button in the Engine Analyzer’s Send menu to leave the Engine Analyzer. 

2. 
The Circle Track Analyzer will be automatically activated and run. 

3. 
When the Circle Track Analyzer stars up the first time, you are given notice that a power curve is available and can be loaded from the Engine specs menu.  You will also notice some new commands on the Main Menu called “Engine Analyzer”.  Clicking on these will return to control to the Engine Analyzer program which originally called the Circle Track Analyzer, but will leave the Circle Track Analyzer also running, ready for a new power curve. 

4. 
Important:  Once you load the power curve, the old power curve is gone, unless you saved the vehicle specs including power curve with the Save command or saved it as an Example by clicking on the Save Example button at the Engine specs menu. 

5. 
When you are ready to return to the Engine Analyzer, simply click on one of the Engine Analyzer buttons (at the Main Menu or in the Test Results screen) or commands in the Menu bar.  You do not have to load the power curve. You can jump between the Engine Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer as many times as you want. 


If an Engine Analyzer program is not currently running and “talking” to the Circle Track Analyzer, you can also start the process by clicking on the Load from Engine Analyzer menu command.  You will get the screen of Figure 2.5. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Troubleshooting 
If this process of loading  power curves into the Circle Track Analyzer from the Engine Analyzer does not work like described above, consider the following. 
• 
You do not own the correct Windows version of Engine Analyzer program. 

• 
You have renamed the Circle Track Analyzer or Engine Analyzer executable (.EXE) file. The Circle Track Analyzer should be CTA.EXE. 

• 
In the Engine Analyzer program, click on the “Look for It” button by the Circle Track Analyzer option to see if the program can find a correct Windows version. 

• 
You are trying to help the programs transfer control to each other.  Do not minimize one of the programs, then activate the other program as this can confuse the process. 


Figure 2.6 Optional Engine Analyzer Send Screen To Tell Where Circle Track Analyzer is Located (required for some early Engine Analyzers) 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 



2.3 Vehicle Specs 
The Vehicle specs describe transmission's efficiency, gear ratios, vehicle size, weight, weight distribution,  final drive system, tires 
and aerodynamics. 
Figure 2.7 Vehicle Specs Menu 


Tire specs have a large effect on traction, cornering ability and thereforeGeneral Vehicle specs. Click on lap times, especially on short tracks
the Clc buttons to calculate inputs from other info, like weight Transmission specs affect engine RPM %s from 4 corner weights. range and power losses (efficiency). 

Click here to print this screen. Aerodynamic specs usually do not have a large effect until vehicle speeds start to exceed 100 MPH. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

General Vehicle Specs 
Total Weight with Driver, lbs 
Total vehicle weight in pounds with the driver, ballast, and the amount of fuel you want to analyze. 
% Rear % Left % Cross 
These 3 specs describe the vehicle's weight distribution, indicating the % of the vehicle's total weight which is on the rear tires, on the left tires, and the right front + left rear tires.  A typical street car (same suspension left and right) are designed for having 50% Left and 50% Cross weight, and only perhaps 42% Rear. 
Note that the result of these weight percents combined with the Vehicle Weight are displayed as the corner weights next to these inputs. If you know your car’s corner weights but not the percents, click on one of the Clc (calculation) buttons to calculate these percents.  See Section 2.7.3. 
Height of CG 
Describes the height of the vehicle's center of gravity from level ground. A sports car will have a lower CG than a 4WD truck.  Increasing the height of the CG (installing a lift kit) will increase weight transfer from the left to the right when cornering, generally overloading the right tires and reducing lap times. 
This information is not readily available, but can be estimated by measuring the distance from the ground to a spot approximately 5 inches above the center of the engine's crankshaft at the front of the engine (typical V-8 camshaft level).   
The Height of C.G. can also be measured by weighing the front and back of the car level, then weighing it again with one of the car raised. This data can be analyzed by clicking on the Clc button and is discussed in Section 2.7.4. 
Important:  The Height of C.G. is used in several calculations, but is VERY difficult to measure exactly, and NOT really critical to know exactly.  For that reason it is recommended that you just estimate as 5 inches higher than the crankshaft height off the ground.  If you are still not sure, use 20 inches. 
Wheelbase 
Is the distance in inches from the center of the front wheels to the center of the rear wheels.  Decreasing the wheelbase usually improves cornering ability because it reduces the moment of inertia of the vehicle.  For example, it is much harder to spin (turn) an 18 foot 2x4 then a 3 foot 4x12, even they both weigh the same. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Rear Axle Ratio 
For most race cars, this is the rear axle ratio or final drive. For chain drive vehicle's (go carts, motorcycles, etc.) this is the chain ratio.  For quick change rear ends, this is the total axle ratio, rear axle ratio (usually 4.88 or 4.56) times the ratio of the spur gears. Click on the Clc button to obtain a menu to calculate Rear Axle Ratio based on number of teeth for your particular situation (Section 2.7.5). 
Rear Axle Type 
This specs tells the program how to estimate the power losses in the rear axle.  Generally the more heavy duty or the more gears in the rear end, the more the power losses. 
Aerodynamics 
Type 
Click on the down arrow key to pick a general body description, or to “Use Specs Below” where you can now enter most any combination of specs you want.  Then the other aerodynamic specs become enabled so you can change them.  Beginners should pick a general body description Type. 
Drag Coefficient 
The coefficient of drag (Cd) is an engineering term used to describe how aerodynamic a vehicle's exterior design is (how easily it "slices" through the wind). A low value for the Cd indicates the car is aerodynamic and requires little power from the engine to overcome wind resistance.  Many automotive manufacturers now publish the vehicle's Cd in advertising, since an aerodynamic car is a more fuel efficient car.  An aerodynamic car is also a faster car.  If the actual Cd of a particular vehicle can not be found, use Table 
2.1to estimate the Cd for different types of vehicles  Use Table 2.2 to estimate how much Cd and Cl will change from a modification. Table 2.3 shows examples of changing rear spoiler angle. 
Table 2.1: Estimate Drag Coefficient (Cd) 
Type of Vehicle  Cd  
Motorcycle  .70-1.10  
Modern Motorcycle (fairings, etc.)  .50-.70  
Pickup Truck  .50-.70  
Sedan before 1980  .45-.60  
Sports Car before 1980  .45-.55  
Open Convertible  .50-.70  
Modern Aerodynamic Sedan  .35-.45  
Modern Aerodynamic Sports Car  .30-.40  
“Best Case" vehicle  .11  
Table 2.2: Estimate How Modifications Affect Cd and Cl (lift coefficient) 


Modification  Change Cd  Change Cl (lift)  
-4 deg Angle of Attack (vs stock) *1  -.04  -100%  
+4deg Angle of Attack (vs stock)  +.04  +100%  
Open Side Windows (vs closed)  +.02  
Open T-Top & Side Windows  +.08  
4" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle) *2  -.04  -25%  
8" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle)  .00  -50%  
12" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle)  +.08  -55%  
1" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle) *3  -.03  -15%  
2" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle)  .00  -25%  
4" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle)  +.08  -35%  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Table 2.3 Changing Spoiler Angle on 94 Winston Cup Car  
Old Spoiler Angle  
New Spoiler Angle  Change in  20 deg  30 deg  40 deg  50 deg  60 deg  
20 deg  Cd  0  -.011  -.020  -.028  -.034  
Cl  0  .022  .040  .053  .062  
30 deg  Cd  .011  0  -.009  -.017  -.023  
Cl  -.022  0  .018  .031  .040  
40 deg  Cd  .020  .009  0  -.008  -.013  
Cl  -.040  -.018  0  .013  .022  
50 deg  Cd  .028  .017  .008  0  .006  
Cl  -.053  -.031  -.013  0  .009  
60 deg  Cd  .034  .023  .013  .006  0  
Cl  -.062  -.040  -.022  -.009  0  

Spoiler Angle In Table 2.3 
Notes concerning Table 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3: 
Spoiler Angle In Table 2.2 
• 
Change the vehicle's attitude from the production attitude 4 degrees, where a negative angle of attack is when the front is lowered and the rear is raised.                                                

• 
For this table, an air dam is defined as a flat plate the full width of the 


  Side View of 
vehicle projecting vertically down directly below front bumper (based on 
  Rear Deck
typical 1970s or earlier design).  Most modern, production designs integrate 

air dams for optimum Cd, therefore adding an air dam to a modern vehicle 
will likely show an increase in Cd but perhaps a reduction in Cl. 
• 
For this table, a spoiler is defined as a flat plate extending the full width of the vehicle at the top rear edge of the rear deck (trunk) lid, angled back 20 degrees from vertical.  See Figure. 

• 
Table 2.2 shows typical effects from modifications.  Individual vehicle's can differ considerable. 

• 
Advertised Cds are usually the "best case".  For a realistic Cd, add .03 to .05 to the advertised Cd for production vehicles.  

• 
Table 2.3 shows effect of changing the spoiler angle on a 94 Winston Cup car.  A different body style and spoiler design would give different results.  Changes in the rear spoiler angle affect downforce on the front and rear of the car differently and can significantly affect handling.  To use Table 2.3, say  you were changing the spoiler angle from 40 to 20 degrees on a car with a .38 Cd and a -.12 Cl.  Forty (40) would be the Old Spoiler angle and 20 would be the New.  This would result in the Drag Coefficient (Cd) decreasing by .020 resulting in .36 and lift coefficient increasing by .040 resulting in a Cl of -.08. 


Lift Coefficient 
Like Drag Coefficient, the Lift Coefficient is an engineering term which describes how much lift the car’s shape develops, much like a wing. The higher the Lift Coefficient, the more the lift.  However, race car’s want downforce, not lift, so you want a low lift coefficient A production car will have a Lift Coefficient in the range from .2 to .3, meaning the car actually unloads the tires somewhat at high speed (not good).  Add some effective spoilers and air dams and this will drop this to close to 0, or that the tires do not unload at high speed (better).  Only when you get into race cars with large wings, spoilers, air dams close to the ground do you see negative lift coefficients like -.1 or -.2, which actually develop downforce at high speeds (good).  The “ground effects” Indy cars of several years ago actually had lift coefficients in the range of -1.0 to -2.0, generating tremendous amount of downforce. Check Tables 2.2 and 2.3 to see how Cl (coefficient of lift) is affected by modifications. 
To see the amount of downforce or lift being generated from a set of vehicle specs, set the Bank Angle to 0 in the Running Conditions menu.  Then the Downforce column in the Test Results will be due only to aerodynamic downforce, which depends on Lift Coefficient, Frontal Area, vehicle speed and air density. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Technical note:  Lift Coefficient is multiplied by top area of the car, the square feet of the car from a top or plan view.  We do not ask for the top area in the program, but estimate it as 3 times larger than the Frontal Area. 

In v3.6, there is now a Front and Rear Lift Coefficient.  See Appendix 5. 
Frontal Area, sq ft 
The frontal area is the area in square feet the vehicle's silhouette occupies when viewed from the front.  Use the formula in Fig 2.10 to estimate frontal area.  Frontal areas are in the range of 16 sq ft for a small passenger car to 30 sq ft or more for a full size pick-up truck.  Also see Section 2.7.6 for calculating Frontal Area, sq ft  by clicking on the Clc button. 
Transmission Type 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box to pick a general description of the transmission.  This choice only affects power losses. All choices assume a clutch is used between the engine and transmission, not a torque converter, even if an automatic transmission is used. 
Ratio of Trans Gear Used 
Is the gear ratio for the single transmission gear used during the race.  The Circle Track Analyzer v2.0 assumes the entire race is done in 1 gear.  If this is top gear in a “non-overdrive” transmission (3rd for a 3 speed, 4th for a 4 speed, etc), this gear ratio is usually 1.  If you are using a Pinto 2.3L SR4 wide ratio transmission in 3rd gear, this could be 1.66.  The program also assumes anything different from 1 produces additional power losses. 
Rear Wheel/Tire Specs 
Type 
Click on this combo box to select general tire type.  This choice will have a large effect on overall tire traction and cornering ability. 
Wheels & Tires Wt, lbs 
This is the weight of one wheel/tire assembly, which can be obtained by weighing the tire mounted on the wheel on a weighing (or bathroom) scale. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Figure 2.10, Tire Circumference 
Tire Circumference, inches Left Right 
The circumference of the Left and Right tires is the distance around the tread as measured with a tape measure.  See Figure 2.10. The difference between the left and right tires is know as stagger,  which is calculated from your 2 inputs and displayed here 
Since Tire Diameter has a Clc button, see Section 2.7.7 for 

calculating Tire Circumference from production tire sizes like P225­60-15. 
Tread Width 
Is the width of the tire's contact patch on the ground.  This number will have a large effect on overall tire traction, and therefore lap times, especially on short tracks. 
Traction Factor 
Traction Efficiency describes how well the tires 'hook up' to the road surface.  It is affected by road surface condition, tire conditions (temperature, pressure, compound, etc.) and suspension setup.  Unfortunately, this version of the Circle Track Analyzer is not “smart enough” to know how to use all the suspension inputs in the Front and Rear Suspension input screens to estimate overall tire traction.  Therefore, use this Traction Factor to “dial in” how well your suspension is working your tires. 
Obviously this spec has a critical impact on overall tire traction.  Because it depends on so many variables, it is difficult to estimate.  You can click on the Clc button to obtain a general list of estimates.  Most likely you will have to fine tune this estimate based on your vehicle's actual lap times at a particular track.  You can also use the Match Your Lap Times option from the Main Menu to have the program estimate Traction Factor. 
Dirt track conditions can be somewhat simulated by adjusting this Traction Factor down to match your lap times on dirt tracks. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.4 Front Suspension Specs 
The Front Suspension menu has 4 major sections, each which will be discussed in this section: 
1. 
Static Layout Dimensions 

2. 
Other Misc. Specs 

3. 
Show Dive & Roll 

4. 
Suspension Layout Drawing 


See Appendix 3, 4 and (especially) 5 for significant new features added to this Front Suspension screen. 
2.4.1 Static Layout Dimensions 
Before we define the inputs in this section, lets take a minute to describe how you will make these measurements. 
Taking Suspension Measurements 
You enter the measurements from your car's front suspension members into the Layout Screen.  To start, park the car on a flat, level surface. First we must decide on what we will call the car’s centerline. Many people use a distance half way between the left and right tire patches.  The disadvantage of this method is if you change rim widths or wheel offsets your centerline can change.  This means all your measurements are now off also.  Therefore, we usually recommend the center of the drivetrain, which would be the center of the engine for most car’s front suspensions.  This is a point which will usually will stay in one place.  The other advantage of this choice is the rear suspension’s centerline is now the center of the driveshaft and the pinion gear.  This ensures consistency front and rear for most race cars, and provides an easy reference for most left and right measurements. 
In our Roll Center Calculator program which deals with the front suspension only, we recommend a distance half way between the frame rails, or the frame mounts on the lower arms.  This is usually very similar to the center of the drivetrain. 
On cars without a front engine, rear drive drivetrain layout, use the distance half way between the frame rails, or the frame mounts on the lower arms.  Then be sure to project a line straight back, parallel to the frame to mark the rear centerline for the rear suspension.  You can also use the center of the front tire patches, being aware of the problem if you change some tire offset specs. 
Once you’ve decided on the method, either: 
• 
Drop a plumb bob (pointed weight on a string) down from the center of the crank pulley. 

• 
Use a tape measure to mark a point on the floor which is halfway between the your references. This will now be your car’s centerline and is 0 in the X (horizontal) direction in the Static Layout Dimensions section. 



When picking a centerline, the most important thing is to be consistent from front and rear on the same vehicle, and from setup to setup on the same vehicle.  Once you decide on a centerline for a particular car, you must make all measurements from this same centerline. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Figure 2.12, Finding Car Centerline and Measuring Front Suspension Points  (typical X and Height measurement shown for Lower Frame Pivot) 
Car Centerline Preferred method is to use 

 X  center of engine                           crankshaft Height  
lf the distance between Hathe lower arm mounts can also be used as centerline 
 
 

          Alternate Car Centerline 

Then with the plumb bob, place the string on the center of a new suspension point to be measured and drop the bob until it just touches the floor.  Measure the distance from the car's centerline to where the plumb bob points on the floor.  This is the "X" distance for that particular suspension point. 
You can print a blank worksheet for recording your measurements by clicking on File at the upper left of the screen (in the Menu Bar), then clicking on Print Blank Worksheet.  Be sure you have first selected the correct Suspension Type (Double A Arm, McPherson Strut, etc) by clicking on Suspension Type  in the Menu Bar to obtain the correct worksheet for your car.  
Your choice of Suspension Type will have a large effect on what the Front Suspension screen looks like.  Because Double A Arm is so popular, it will be discusses first. The other suspension types are discussed only as to what inputs are different than the Double A Arm inputs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
For entering dimensions, 2 other options can be important: 
Enter X & Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Jnts Enter X & Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle 
If it is easier to measure the lengths or the A Arms and the angle of the A Arms, choose the Arm Len & Angle option.  You still have to measure the X and Height of one end of the arm, but not both.   For the Upper Arm, you will enter the Ball Joint X and Height, and the Length and the Angle. For the Lower Arm, you will enter the Frame Mount X and Height, and the Length and the Angle. Changing this option will Enable and Disable the appropriate dimension specs so you know which values to enter.  This option is not available for McPherson Strut suspensions.  See Figure 2.13. 
Camber Changes with New Inputs Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs 
For entering a new suspension, it may be better to select the “Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs” option.  This prevents Camber from continually being changed (possibly to very unusual values) as you enter new measurements.  Once you have a new suspension entered, choosing the “Camber Changes with New Inputs” option works well to see how suspension adjustments or modifications will change camber. See Figure 2.13. 
Enter all the X and Height measurements into the screen.  The screen's drawing and calculated values are updated after each entry.  This lets you immediately see 
if a value you entered looks wrong. 

The Roll Center location and Left and Right Instant Centers are also drawn in as large dots.  Instant Centers are the imaginary points about which each side of the suspension tends to rotate and usually appear on the opposite side of the suspension.  For example, Right side’s Instant Center will usually appear on the left side of the Suspension Layout drawing.  The Roll Center is black on most computers, and the Instant Centers match the colors of the Left or Right suspension drawing.  If these locations are off the screen, they are drawn at the correct height with an arrow pointing to their "off screen" location. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Double A Arm Measurements 
Upper Ball Joint Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the ball joint on the upper arm on either the right side or left side, in inches.  Height is the distance from the ground to this same location. See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Note: If you are using Moog Auto (part of Cooper Industries) ball joints, you can call them at 800-323-5473 and they will send a print of the joint to let you more precisely locate the center of  the ball. 

Upper Frame Pivot Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the pivot on the frame mount on the upper arm on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
For arms that have angled mounts as many stock arms do or strut mounts, check Figure 2.15 for the most accurate way to find the arm’s mounting point. 
See Appendix 5 for a new feature that makes it easier and more accurate to determine exactly where 

the Frame Mounts should be measured. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Lower Ball Joint Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the ball joint on the lower arm on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location. See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Lower Frame Pivot Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the pivot on the frame mount on the lower arm on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Upper Spring Pad Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the upper mounting pad for the spring, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Tip: If you are more interested in shock travel than spring travel, enter the top shock mount location.  However, the Wheel Rate calculated from the Spring Rate you enter in the Other Specs section will not be exactly correct. 
Lower Spring Pad Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the mounting pad for the spring on lower right arm, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Tip: If you are more interested in shock travel than spring travel, enter the lower shock mount location.  However, the Wheel Rate calculated from the Spring Rate you enter in the Other Specs section will not be exactly correct. 
Upper Arm Length 
Length of upper right arm from Pivot Center to Ball Joint center as viewed from the front, in inches. This can be shorter than actual length measured along the arm if arm is swept forward or back.  See Figure 2.15.  This spec is only enabled if you have chosen the ‘Enter X & Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle’ option. 
Upper Arm Angle 
Angle of the upper left arm as viewed from the front, in degrees.  A positive angle means the arm angles up as the arm goes away from the car centerline, which is typical. 
Lower Arm Length 
Lower Arm Angle 
See Upper Arm Length and Upper Arm Angle explanations above. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

McPherson Strut 
You can select a McPherson Strut front suspension layout by clicking on Suspension Type at the top of the Front Suspension screen, then selecting McPherson Strut. The screen will change somewhat.  The Upper Ball Joint and Frame Pivot inputs are changed to Upper and Lower Strut locations.  The calculated Upper Arm Dim. specs have been changed to Strut Dim. 
For inputs not shown in this section, see the definitions in the previous Double A Arm section. 
Figure 2.16 Lower Strut Location 
Do Not use mounting holes if they do not lie on the ‘line of action’ of the strut. 
Upper Strut Loc. 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the upper mounting point of the strut on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance 
Use a point which does lie 
from the ground to this same location. See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible 
on the line of action 
centerlines. 
of the strut. 
Lower Strut Loc. 

X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the lower mounting point of the strut on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location. The line of action of the strut must pass through this point.  Therefore if the mount is to the side of the strut’s line of action, choose the point at the mount’s height, but the X distance should be at the strut’s centerline or line of action. See Figure 2.16.  See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Straight Axle 
You can select a Straight Axle front suspension layout by clicking on Suspension Type at the top of the Front Suspension screen, then selecting Straight Axle. The screen will change significantly.  Only the Upper and Lower Spring Pads are common with the Double A Arm input specs for Static Layout Dimensions.  The only other inputs concern the Panhard Bar or J bar which locates the front Roll Center.  In the section called Other Specs, calculated specs like Scrub Radius, King Pin Angle and Spindle Angle are removed. 
For inputs not shown in this section (Spring Pad locations), see the definitions in the previous Double A Arm section. 
Panhard Bar 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the Panhard Bar mounting points on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location. See pages 27-30 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Panhard Bar is Attached to Axle on Which Side: 
Select the option which identifies which side (end) of the Panhard bar (or J bar) is attached to the straight axle.  The other end is then attached to the body. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Double A Arm with Torsion Bars 
You can select a Double A Arm with Torsion Bars front suspension layout by clicking on Suspension Type at the top of the Front Suspension screen, then selecting Double A Arm with Torsion Bars.  The screen will change somewhat.  The Spring Pad specs are removed from the Static Layout Dimensions.  In the section called Other Specs, calculated specs like Spring Length and Spring Angle are removed, and the Spring Rate input is changed to T. Bar Rate (torsion bar rate). 
Note that Torsion Bar Rate can be calculated by clicking on the Clc button next to these inputs.  See Section 
2.7.9. Torsion Bar Rate depends on the bar and the lower A arm length. Should you calculate a Torsion Bar Rate for a certain lower A arm length, then change dimensions to simulate a different arm length, the program will automatically adjust the Torsion Bar rate for what it would be assuming the same bar is used with the new arm length. However, this may not be what you want to be simulating.  Therefore, it is best that you completely layout all the Static Layout Dimensions first. Then calculate the Torsion Bar Rate or enter the rate directly. 
For inputs not shown in this section, see the definitions in the previous Double A Arm section. 
T Bar Rate 
Is the force required to move the ball joint on the lower arm 1 inch, in pounds.  The torsion bar is assumed to be linear, that is if 500 lbs compresses the spring (twists the bar) 1", 1000 lbs will compress (twists the bar) the spring 2".  See Assumptions in Appendix 1 for limits on bar/spring movement. Click on the Clc button next to these specs to calculate a spring rate (or Torsion Bar Rate from other inputs).  See Section 2.7.9. 
2.4.2 Other Specs 
Spring Length 
Installed or Static length of the spring measured along spring centerline before any Dive or Roll.  You can not enter this value directly.  This length is calculated from the X and Height for the Upper and Lower Spring Pad Locations.  This value is useful to 
check that your X and Height measurements are entered correctly, as it should closely match your installed spring length. 
Spring Angle 
Installed angle of spring measured between spring centerline and vertical, in degrees. You can not enter this value directly.  This angle is calculated from the X and Height for the Upper and Lower Spring Pad Locations.  This value is useful to check that your X and Height measurements are entered correctly, as it should closely match your installed spring angle. 
Spring Rate (T. Bar Rate for Torsion Bar Suspensions) 
Is the force required to compress the uninstalled spring 1 inch, in pounds.  The spring is assumed to be linear, that is if 500 lbs compresses the spring 1", 1000 lbs will compress the spring 2".  This is an input which you enter and effects the Wheel Rate described below.  Click on the Clc button next to these specs to calculate a spring rate 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(or Torsion Bar Rate from other inputs).  See Section 2.7.9.  Also see Double A Arm with Torsion Bars suspension type on previous 
page, and Assumptions in Appendix 1 for limits on bar/spring movement. 
Wheel Rate 
The force required to move wheel center 1 inch up while the chassis does not move, in pounds.  This is a calculated spec (can not be entered directly) and depends on the Spring Rate and suspension geometry. 
Scrub Radius 
The distance from where the king pin axis hits the ground and the center of the tire patch. See Figure 2.18 for King Pin Axis. This is a calculated spec (can not be entered directly). 
Camber 
The degrees of tilt of the wheel with respect to the ground as viewed from the front, in degrees.  Negative camber 

means the top of the wheel tilts in towards the car, which is typical of most race cars. This is an input which you enter.  See Figure 2.18. 
Dynamic Camber 
The new, Dynamic camber of the wheel caused by Dive and Roll.  See Camber above. 
Track, in 
Track is the distance from the centerline to the center of the tire patch on the ground. 
King Pin Angle 
King pin axis is the line intersecting the upper and lower ball joints.  The angle is the angle between this axis and a vertical line.  See Figure 2.18. This is a calculated spec (can not be entered directly). 
Spindle Angle 
Spindle Angle is the angle total of the king pin angle and the camber angle.  As long as you are using the same spindles, the spindle angle must stay the same as you change arm lengths, mounting points or shim the arms in and out.  Spindle Angle is not displayed unless you have selected the Front Suspension option of “Show Spindle Angle”.  See Figure 2.18 
Roll Bar Rate 
Is the force required to move one arm of the roll bar 1 inch, in pounds, while the other arm does not move.  The bar is assumed to be linear, that is if 500 lbs moves the arm 1", 1000 lbs will move the arm 2".  This is an input which you enter and effects the vehicle’s roll stiffness.  Click on the Clc button next to this spec to calculate a Roll Bar Rate.  See Section 2.7.10. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Roll Bar Length 
Is the length of the roll bar in inches.  This length tells the program where the bar attaches to the lower arms, and therefore lets the program determine the motion ratio of the bar 
2.4.3 Show Dive & Roll 
As shown in Figure 2.19, you must first select the Yes option in this section before any of these inputs or command buttons become enabled. 
Dive 

The amount the car's front end rolls (leans) due to cornering forces, compared to its static (standing still) angle. A positive (+) angle means the car is leaning to the Right, typical of Left turns. Use a negative (-) number to lean Left (Right turns). 
Draw ‘Big’ 
This command button lets you select a screen mode where the Suspension Layout is drawn about twice its normal size.  In this mode you can see things in more detail.  The Draw ‘Big’ mode also displays Spring Deflection, which is not displayed in the Normal Sized screen. 
Spring Deflection 
The change in the length of the spring due to Dive or Roll.  Negative (-) means spring compression from diving, positive (+) means elongation from rising.  Since shocks generally are mounted close to the spring locations, shock travel is very similar to Spring Deflection. 
2.4.4 Suspension Layout 
The features of the Suspension Layout drawing are discussed in Figure 2.20 below. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Figure 2.20 Major Features of the Suspension Layout Screen 
Camber Gain and the motion on which it is based is given in this line. Right Instant Center drawn in blue just like the right side suspension. The arrow drawn in this Figure (not on the computer screen) shows how it has moved from its static location (gray dot with blue outline). 

Left Instant Center drawn in red just like the left side suspension. The arrow drawn in this Figure (not on the computer screen) shows how it has moved from its static location (gray dot with red outline). The red arrow pointing off the screen shows its actual location is off the screen. 
Roll Center drawn in black. The arrow drawn in this Figure (not on the computer screen) shows how it has moved from its static location (gray dot with black outline). 



Dynamic Roll Center location (due to Dive and Roll)is shown in black. 
Static Roll Center location is shown in black, unless the car is in Dive and/or Roll. Then it is shown in gray (as shown here) for comparison to the Dynamic Roll Center. 
Letters A-L relate to dimensions listed in Static Layout Dimensions section. See page 27. 
Tips for understanding Roll Center and Camber Gain discussed in Figure 2.20 are listed at the end of Appendix 2. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Menu Options 
In the Menu Bar at the top of the Front Suspension screen, there are 7 main menu commands: 
1. 
Back 

2. 
File 

3. 
Options 

4. 
Suspension Type 

5. 
Shim 

6. 
Comments 

7. 
Help 


These are discussed in this section. 

File 
Click on File to present several standard Windows File options: 
New Front Suspension blanks out all the current spec inputs, calculated values, comments and changes the current Front Suspension file name to Untitled. 
Open Example Front Suspension presents the Circle Track Analyzer’s File Open screen, where you can open an Example Front Suspension file which was provided by Performance Trends.  These examples include comments and all measurements for the particular Front Suspension Type.  These are provided to let you see typical measurements for different types of Front Suspensions, and are saved in the XFRONT folder (directory). 
Open Saved Front Suspension is much like Open Example Front Suspension command above except:  1) You are presented Front Suspension Files that you have saved. (See the Save commands below.)  These are saved by default to the FRONT folder (directory).  2) You can click on the File Open screen’s Advanced button and be presented with the standard Windows File Open dialog box.  From there you can open a Front Suspension file or even a Roll Center Calculator (another Performance Trends program) file which you have saved somewhere else. You can select different directories or disk drives for files.  You can choose most any file, but if the program senses the file is not a Front Suspension or Roll Center Calculator file, you will be given notice and the file will not be opened. 
Save saves the current Front Suspension specs to the current file name.  This is a shortcut to update the current file with the current specs and measurements. 
Save As presents the standard Circle Track Analyzer Save screen, where you can save the file to most any name of your choosing.  Save As is how you change the name of a Front Suspension file.  At this screen you can also click on the Advanced button which presents a standard Windows File Open dialog box (not shown in Beginner Level).  Then you can save a Front Suspension file to a name of your choosing.  Certain names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names with more than 3 characters to the right or 8 characters to the left of a period (.) . 

• 
Names over 11 characters long (12 characters if one is a period). 

• 
Names which include the characters: 


/  \  [  ]  :  |  <  >  +  =  ;  ,  *  ? or spaces You can also select different directories or disk drives for saving files. 
Print prints the Front Suspension Screen. 
Print Blank Worksheet prints the Front Suspension screen with blank boxes for all inputs. 
Windows Print Setup opens the standard Windows menu for selecting the printer, page orientation, etc. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Options 
Click on Options for the list shown in Figure 2.23. 
Enter X & Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Jnts Enter X & Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle 
If it is easier to measure the lengths or the A Arms and the angle of the A Arms, choose the Arm Len & Angle option.  You still have to measure the X and Height of one end of the arm, but not both.   For the Upper Arm, you will enter the Ball Joint X and Height, and the Length and the Angle. For the Lower Arm, you will enter the Frame Mount X and Height, and the Length and the Angle.  Changing this option will Enable and Disable the appropriate dimension specs so you know which values to enter.  This ‘Len & Angle’ option is not available for McPhErson Strut suspensions.  For more details, see the Example 4.3. 
Draw Extension Lines Don’t Draw Extension Lines 
Lets you choose if imaginary extension lines should be drawn in the Suspension Layout.  These extension lines help show how the Instant Centers and Roll Center are arrived at. 
Background Car Layout Color - Light Gray Background Car Layout Color - Dark Gray 
Lets you select the color for the background car and suspension drawing in the Layout screen.  The Background Car shows the static position of the suspension and car before any Dive and/or Roll. 

Camber Changes with New Inputs 
Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs 
For entering a new suspension, it may be better to select the “Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs” option.  This prevents Camber from continually being changed (possibly to very unusual values) as you enter new measurements.  Once you have a new suspension entered, choosing the “Camber Changes with New Inputs” option works well to see how suspension adjustments or modifications will change tire camber. 
Camber Gain Definition Specs 
Click on this option and you get the menu of Figure 2.24.  This menu lets you change the amount of body movement the program uses to determine Camber Gain.  
First you select the Type of Calc, which means either to use the program's standard definition of 1" of Dive with No roll, or to Use Specs Below (in this menu). 
If you select to Use Specs Below, the Body Dive, inches and Body Roll, degrees specs become enabled so you can enter or change them.  If you click on the OK/Exit button while Use Specs Below is selected, the Camber Gain at the Main Screen will now be based on these custom specs.  This definition is always displayed in the Suspension Layout screen as shown in Figure 2.20. 
Click on Cancel to close this menu and return to the original specs used for calculating Camber Gain.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Tips on Camber Gain are listed at the end of Appendix 2. 
Show Spindle Angle Don’t Show Spindle Angle 
Lets you select whether Spindle Angle is displayed.  Some users may find Spindle Angle confusing, so the program comes from the factory with these specs not displayed. 
Suspension Type 

Click on Suspension Type to choose the type of Front Suspension layout.  As you change Suspension Type, various options will be enabled or disabled.  For example, the Shim option for inputting the Length and Angle of the Strut are only available for Double A Arm suspensions.  Also realize that if you switch Suspension Types with a current set of suspension dimensions, the drawing will look very unusual. 
Figure 2.26 shows major differences for the McPherson Strut Suspension Type. 
Figure 2.26 McPherson Strut Suspension Type 
Camber Gain Definition is always shown here 
Struts replace the arms drawn for the Double A Arm suspension type. 
Strut dimensions replace the Upper Arm dimensions here also. 
The Shim option or inputing the Length and Angle of the Strut are not available for this suspension type. 

Shim 
Click on Shim when this option is enabled, and then select from the choices of shimming the left or right arm  You are then presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.27. 
This menu lets you move the Frame Pivot point of the upper A arm in or out, as is usually done by adding or removing shims.  The software keeps the length of the arm constant and calculates where the Ball Joint end will be after the adjustment.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

First, select whether you want to Add or Remove shims from the first Combo box.  Then select whether you want to use standard sixteenth (1/16) and eighth (1/8) inch shims, or to enter some other 'Custom' shim adjustment.  After your selection, the lower inputs will become enabled as appropriate.  Selecting 'No Shims' disables the lower inputs. 
An estimate of the new Camber is given at the top for the shim adjustment currently entered, with the Current Camber also given for comparison.  (If you have Not selected the option at the Main Screen that Camber should be adjusted with changing dimensions, you will be asked if you want Camber to be adjusted before it is.) 
The entries and suspension layout on the Main Screen are not updated until you click on 'Use Calc Value'. 
Important: This menu assumes that Adding shims moves the Frame Pivot farther out from the car (reducing negative camber or increasing positive camber).  Some chassis (for example: the left side on some Lefthander Chassis) work the opposite, adding shims moves the pivot inward.  If your chassis is like this, select 'Remove Shims' if you are actually adding shims or 'Add Shims' if you are actually removing shims. 
Comments 
Click on Comments for the Comment Editing screen shown in Figure 
2.28. Comments are printed with your other specs when you request a print of the Front Suspension screen (at least the first 300 characters or so), when you print Vehicle Specs with the Calculated Results, and are 

saved with a Front Suspension file and with the complete Vehicle File. 
Comments are a good way to keep track of what each saved file is. 

ur 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.5 Rear Suspension Specs 
The Rear Suspension  menu is similar to the Front Suspension screen described in Section 2.4, but is simpler.  It describes the Rear Suspension layout and measurements.  The top choice of Rear Suspension Type has a large effect on how this screen looks and what measurements can be entered. 
Check Appendix 4 for new Rear Suspension types, like Angled 4 Link. 
Figure 2.29 Rear Suspension Screen for Suspension Type: Truck Arms 
Menu Commands Type is a critical spec which dictates what this screen looks like and what inputs are used. 
Name of current Rear Suspension File 
Layout screen shows how program is using your measurements.  This is handy way to spot errors in inputs. Screen also shows calculated results like Wheel Rates and Roll Center Location. 
Help box gives brief description of spec you have clicked on. 

Taking Suspension Measurements 
You make measurements and enter them into this screen much as you do for the Front Suspension.  Start by parking the car on a flat, level surface. First we must decide on what we will call the car’s centerline.  Many people use a distance half way between the left and right tire patches.  The disadvantage of this method is if you change rim widths or wheel offsets your centerline can change.  This means all your measurements are now off also.  Therefore, we usually recommend the center of the drivetrain, which would be the center of the engine for most car’s front suspensions.  This is a point which will usually will stay in one place.  The other advantage of this choice is the front suspension’s centerline is now the center of the engine.  This ensures consistency front and rear for most race cars, and provides an easy reference for most left and right measurements. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

On cars without a front engine, rear drive drivetrain layout, use the distance half way between the frame rails, or the frame mounts on the lower arms.  Then be sure to project a line straight back, parallel to the frame to mark the rear centerline for the rear suspension.  You can also use the center of the front tire patches, being aware of the problem if you change some tire offset specs. 
Once you’ve decided on the method, either: 
• 
Drop a plumb bob (pointed weight on a string) down from the center of the driveshaft or pinion gear. 

• 
Use a tape measure to mark a point on the floor which is halfway between the your references. This will now be your car’s centerline.  All measurements asking for a distance from something to Centerline is a measurement from this centerline our to either the left or the right.  For example, Tire to Centerline is the distance from the center of the tire patch on the ground to the car’s centerline. 


When picking a centerline, the most important thing is to be consistent from front and rear on the same vehicle, from setup to setup on the same vehicle, and from vehicle to vehicle. Once you decide on a centerline for a particular car, you must make all measurements from this same centerline. 
With the plumb bob, place the string on the center of a new suspension point to be measured and drop the bob until it just touches the floor.  Measure the distance from the car's centerline to where the plumb bob points on the floor.  This is the distance to Centerline for that particular suspension point. 
You can print a blank worksheet for recording your measurements by clicking on File at the upper left of the screen (in the Menu Bar), then clicking on Print Blank Worksheet.  Be sure you have first selected the correct suspension Type (Trailing Arms, Leaf Springs, etc) by clicking on Type at the top of the inputs to obtain the correct worksheet for your car.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Trailing Arm / Truck Arm Measurements 
Figure 2.30 Trailing Arm Rear Suspension Layout 

Axle to Front Pivot 
Spring to Centerline 
Spring to Axle (positive direction, ahead of axle) 
Spring to Axle (negative direction, behind axle) 
Tire to Centerline 
Pnhd Bar to Centerline 
Calculated Wheel Rates 
Spring Angle 
Drawn Roll Center (black dot) 
Panhard Bar Heights 
Roll Center Location 
Type 
Click on down arrow button to pick a type of  Rear Suspension Layout.  Your choice here will have a large effect on how this screen looks and what measurements can be entered.  Truck Arms are nearly identical to Trailing Arms except they are usually longer, and they angle in toward the center of the car, usually pointing toward the transmission. 
Spring Rate 
Force required to compress the uninstalled spring 1 inch, in pounds.  The spring is assumed linear, that if 500 lbs compress the spring 1", 1000 lbs will compress the spring 2".  Click on the Clc button to calculate spring rate for either a coil spring, leaf spring or torsion bar. See Section 2.7.9.  See Appendix 1 for limits of spring movement. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Tire to Centerline, in 
Distance from car centerline to center of tire patch on the ground, inches.  For ease of consistent measurements for front and rear, use the center of the drivetrain (engine, trans, rear axle) as the car's centerline. 
Spring to Centerline, in 
Distance from car centerline to center of the spring mount pad, in inches.  For ease of consistent measurements for front and rear, use the center of the drivetrain (engine, trans, rear axle) as the car's centerline. 
Spring Angle, deg 
Installed angle of spring measured between spring centerline and vertical, in degrees.  Positive angles tip in toward car centerline at top.  
Spring to Axle, in 
Distance from axle centerline to center of the spring mount pad, in inches.  If the spring is behind the axle, enter a negative (-) number.   
Front Pivot to Axle, in 
Distance from axle centerline to attachment point of the trailing arm on the body, in inches.   
Pnhd Bar to Centerline, in 
Distance from car centerline to the Pan Hard bar (or J bar) pivots on the frame, in inches.  For ease of consistent measurements for front and rear, use the center of the drivetrain (engine, trans, rear axle) as the car's centerline.  
Panhard Bar Heights, in 
Distance from ground to the Pan Hard bar (or J bar) pivots on the frame, in inches.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Leaf Springs 
If you select Leaf Springs, the Spring Rates and Tire to Centerline are the same as described in the Trailing Arm / Truck Arm section, except you would enter the spring rate calculated for a leaf spring.  With Leaf Springs, only measurements from one side are used because the program assumes leaf spring suspensions are symmetrically laid out (same measurements left and right).  However, you 
can still specify a different spring rate and tire track left and right. 
Figure 2.31 Leaf Spring Measurements 
Spring to Centerline 
Distance from the center of the leaf spring to the centerline of the car in inches. 
Spring Front to Axle 
Distance from axle centerline forward to the leaf spring front mount on the frame, in inches. 
Spring Front Height 
Distance from the leaf spring’s front mount down to the ground, in inches. 
Spring Rear to Axle 
Distance from axle centerline back to the leaf spring’s shackles rear mount on the frame, in inches. 

Spring Rear Height 
Distance from the leaf spring’s shackles rear mount on the frame, in inches. 

Spring to Centerline 
Spring Front to Axle 
Spring Rear to Axle 
Roll Center 
Spring Rear Height (measure to where shackles attach to frame) 
Spring Front Height 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Torsion Bars 
If you select Trailing Arm/Torsion Bars/Panhard Bar for a Suspension Type, the layout is very similar to the Trailing Arm / Truck Arm shown in Figure 2.30.  The only difference is the round coil spring is drawn as a torsion bar with an arm the rests on the axle.  The input Spring Rate is switched to T.Bar Rates, lb/in. 
T.Bar Rates, lb/in 
The spring rate of the Torsion Bar with its lever arm.  This can be calculated by clicking on the Clc button, as described in Section 
2.7.9. Note that if the effective length of the lever arm changes, the Torsion Bar rate also changes.  This includes just moving the torsion bar closer or farther from the axle. 
T.Bar Arm to Centerline 
The distance from the center of where the Torsion Bar’s arm rests on the axle housing to the car’s centerline, in inches.  See Figure 2.32. 
Figure 2.32 Torsion Bar with Jacob’s Ladder Suspension Layout 

T. Bar Arm to Centerline 
Roll Center Location 
“To C/L” measurement for point 
D. Other measurements done is a similar fashion. If a point lies to the left of the centerline, enter a negative number. 
“Ht” measurement for point D. Other measurements done is a similar fashion. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Jacob’s Ladder 
If you select Trailing Arm/Torsion Bars/Jacobs Ladder for a Suspension Type, the layout is similar to the Trailing Arm / Truck Arm shown in Figure 2.30.  The 3 major differences are: 
1. 
The round coil spring is drawn as a torsion bar with an arm the rests on the axle.   

2. 
The input Spring Rate is switched to T.Bar Rates, lb/in. 

3. 
The Panhard Bar (or J bar) specs are replaced by the Jacob’s Ladder inputs shown in Figure 2.32. 


Jacobs Ladder Layout 
The 2 mounting points on the 2 links of the Jacobs Ladder are identified by the letters A, B, D and E as shown in Figure 2.32. Enter the measurements for each mounting point as described below. 
To C/L 
Distance from car centerline going Right to the mounting point of Upper Link or Lower Link of the Jacob’s Ladder mounting points, in inches. Enter a negative (-) number if this point is to the left of the car’s centerline.  For ease of consistent measurements for front and rear, use the center of the drivetrain (engine, trans, rear axle) as the car's centerline.  
Ht 
Distance from the ground to the mounting point of Upper Link or Lower Link of the Jacob’s Ladder mounting points, in inches.  Enter a negative (-) number if this point is to the left of the car’s centerline.  For ease of consistent measurements for front and rear, use the center of the drivetrain (engine, trans, rear axle) as the car's centerline.  
Menu Options 
In the Menu Bar at the top of the Rear Suspension screen, there are 4 main menu commands: 
1. 
Back 

2. 
File 

3. 
Comments 

4. 
Help 



These are discussed in this section. 
File 
Click on File to present several standard Windows File options: 
New Rear Suspension blanks out all the current spec inputs, calculated values, comments and changes the current Rear Suspension file name to Untitled. 
Open Example Rear Suspension presents the Circle Track Analyzer’s File Open screen, where you can open an Example Rear Suspension file which was provided by Performance Trends.  These examples include comments and all measurements for the 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

particular Rear Suspension Type.  These are provided to let you see typical measurements for different types of Rear Suspensions, and are saved in the XREAR folder (directory). 
Open Saved Rear Suspension is much like Open Example Rear Suspension command above except:  1) You are presented Rear Suspension Files that you have saved. (See the Save commands below.)  These are saved by default to the REAR folder (directory).  2) You can click on the File Open screen’s Advanced button and be presented with the standard Windows File Open dialog box.  From there you can open a Rear Suspension file which you have saved somewhere else. You can select different directories or disk drives for files.  You can choose most any file, but if the program senses the file is not a Rear Suspension file, you will be given notice and the file will not be opened. 
Save saves the current Rear Suspension specs to the current file name.  This is a shortcut to update the current file with the current specs and measurements. 
Save As presents the standard Circle Track Analyzer Save screen, where you can save the file to most any name of your choosing.  Save As is how you change the name of a Rear Suspension file.  At this screen you can also click on the Advanced button which presents a standard Windows File Open dialog box (not shown in Beginner Level).  Then you can save a Rear Suspension file to a name of your choosing.  Certain names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names with more than 3 characters to the right or 8 characters to the left of a period (.) . 

• 
Names over 11 characters long (12 characters if one is a period). 

• 
Names which include the characters: 


/  \  [  ]  :  |  <  >  +  =  ;  ,  *  ? or spaces You can also select different directories or disk drives for saving files. 
Print prints the Rear Suspension Screen. 
Print Blank Worksheet prints the Rear Suspension screen with blank boxes for all inputs. 
Windows Print Setup opens the standard Windows menu for selecting the printer, page orientation, etc. 
Comments 
Click on Comments for the Comment Editing screen shown in Figure 2.28 for the Front Suspension Comments.  Comments are printed with your other specs when you request a print of the Rear Suspension screen (at least the first 300 characters or so), when you print Vehicle Specs with the Calculated Results, and are saved with a Front Suspension file and with the complete Vehicle File.  Comments are a good way to keep track of what each saved file is. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.6 Calculate Performance 
2.6.1 Running Conditions 
At the Main Menu, you can calculate lap time performance by: 
1. 
Clicking on Calculate Performance to open the Running Conditions menu, then clicking on Calculate Performance. 

2. 
Clicking on the Calc Lap Times button at the top of the Main Menu. 


Figure 2.35 Running Conditions Menu 
This combo box lets you select the combination of weather instruments you will use, including an altimeter. 
Click on Type and you can pick aTrack Specs with typical or specific track, or choose Usegeneral layout showing Specs Below to design your ownhow track looks track. 

Driver Specs describe how aggressively you drive, or how close you take the car to the limits of the tire’s traction. 
If you click on Calculate Performance, you will first be presented with a menu of conditions which describe how you will "run" this vehicle.  These conditions include: 
• 
Weather and wind conditions. 

• 
How often to report results in the output, for example every 0.5 seconds. 

• 
Track specs like length, banking, etc. 

• 
How you drive your vehicle with respect to accelerating and braking. 


Track Weather 
The weather conditions affect both the air's oxygen density which affects engine power, and the air's total density which affects aerodynamic drag.  Many racers use their own personal “weather stations”.  In these cases, be sure you read the Notes on Weather Conditions at the end of this section., page 62. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Method of Recording Weather Data 
Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to be presented with this list of options: 
• 
Radio/TV Report with Rel Hum 

• 
Radio/TV Report with Dew Pt 

• 
Uncorr. Baro with Rel Hum 

• 
Uncorr. Baro with Dew Pt 

• 
Pick a typical “day” . This is an easy method to use reasonable weather conditions when you are not particularly interested in how changes weather conditions will affect performance. 


If you change the Method, the 4 inputs specs in the Weather section are changed or enabled/disabled as necessary to represent the new Method. In addition, all the input specs are adjusted to what they would be with the new Method.  For example, Corr. Barometer of 29.3” at an elevation of 1200 feet is converted to 28.03” Obs Barometer with Elevation disabled.  (Elevation is not important when you are using an uncorrected or observed barometer, as this type of barometer shows the actual air pressure at the track.) 
If you change from “Uncorr Baro” to Radio/TV Report with a “Corr. Baro”, the program will ask for an Elevation for the track, since this is needed to make the Barometer Correction.  All these different inputs are explained below. 
Barometric Pressure 
Corr. Barometer, ''Hg 
This input is used for either “Radio/TV Report with Rel Hum” or “Radio/TV Report with Dew Pt”.  It is the Corrected Barometric Pressure in inches of Mercury you will hear from most any TV or radio weather report.  This spec is disabled if you picked a Typical day, but will display the barometer being used.  
Obs. Barometer, ''Hg 
This input is used for either “Uncorr. Baro with Rel Hum” or “Uncorr. Baro with Dew Pt”.  It is the actual or observed Barometric Pressure in inches of Mercury at the track.  These barometers measure the actual air pressure at the track, and will read approximately .1 inches of mercury less than the barometric pressure you will hear from a TV or radio weather report for each 100 feet of elevation. This spec is disabled if you picked a Typical day, but will display the barometer being used.  
Air Temperature 
Air Temperature deg F 
Air temperature in degrees F of the air at the track.  This spec is used for all Methods of Recording Weather Data.  This spec is disabled if you picked a Typical day, but will display the temperature being used.  
Humidity 
Relative Humidity, % 
Describes the air’s humidity level in percent of humidity the air could hold at its present temperature. Relative Humidity can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from dew point and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.7.11 and 2.7.12. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Dew Point, deg F 
The dew point in degrees F of the air at the track, which describes the air's humidity level.  The Dew Point, deg F must be less than the Air Temperature.  Dew Point can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from relative humidity and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.7.11 and 2.7.12. 
Dew Point is a less confusing way of describing the air's moisture level than relative humidity.  Relative humidity readings are only meaningful if the air temperature when the reading was made is also known.  However, the air's dew point remains constant even when the air temperature changes.  For example, 40 degree air with a 80 % relative humidity has only a 10% relative humidity when the same air is heated to 100 degrees.  However, the dew point remains at 36 degrees for both air temperatures. 
Elevation 
Elevation, ft 
The elevation of the track above sea level in feet.  This spec is only used if you are using a Corrected Barometer, like from a TV or radio station weather report. If the elevation is below sea level, enter a negative (-) feet for this reading.  This spec is disabled if you picked a Typical day, but will display the elevation being used.  
Notes on Weather Readings and Weather Stations 
Many racers will use “weather stations”, a collection of temperature, humidity and barometric pressure measuring devices.  When using these instruments, here are some things to keep in mind: 
• 
Unless you are very close to sea level, an actual (observed or uncorrected) barometer will usually read less than a TV or radio weather report barometer.  For elevations less than 5000 feet, an uncorrected barometer should read approximately 0.1 “ Mercury less for each 100 feet of elevation above sea level.  For example, if your barometer instrument is at 850 feet elevation and the closest weather station reports 30.46” barometric pressure, your barometer should read approximately .85” (850/100 x .1) less, or 30.46-.85= 29.61.  It is useful to keep records of information like this (what your actual barometer reads versus what this simple calculation says it should approximately read) to see if the comparison is constantly jumping around.  If you always make the check at the same place (same elevation) like your home or shop, and the difference is varying high by .1”, than low by .2”, etc., you may want to have the barometer or altimeter checked out. 

• 
If you find that you are making many adjustments to your weather station, you are probably doing something wrong.  A barometer which reads low, but consistently reads low is better for predicting performance trends, than one you are trying to keep accurate by constantly adjusting. it. 

• 
Unless you are racing in very different air, you are probably better off not changing jets.  Unless you know if you were on the rich side or lean side to start with, you may actually be making things worse.  Also, constant carb adjustments are just one more thing to go wrong and cause inconsistency. 


Reports/Graphs 
Reports Results Every... 
Click on this combo box to select how often to report results.  The smaller the time increment you choose, the more detailed the graphs, tabular results and Suspension Analysis.  However, the tabular results are much longer, up to 100 rows of results, which makes for long printouts. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Figure 2.36 Track Specs
Track Specs 
Type 
Click on arrow to select how you want to describe the race track.  The first choice of 'Use Specs Below' enables all track specs so you can describe most any track, or you can pick from the preloaded Typical or specific tracks in the list. 

Track Length                                                  follow ing                                                    line driven                                 by the car.
                                                 Infield Width 
Track Length, ft 
The distance around the track following the 'line' the car will drive, in feet. 
Infield Width, ft 
The distance across the infield in feet.  This tells the program how tight the turns are. 
Bank Angle, deg 
Is the banking of the track in the corners in degrees, for the line the car drives.  If the banking is progressive (steeper at the top), enter the banking for where the car drives (low banking if the car stays low).   
Driver 
Type 
Click on arrow to select how you want to describe the driver.  The first choice of 'Use Specs Below' enables both Driver specs so you can enter both individually, or you can pick from the preloaded Typical examples in the list. 
Accel. Aggressiveness 
Click on arrow to select how quickly the driver gets on the accelerator out of the turn.  The more aggressive the rating, the closer the driver keeps the tires to the limits of the 'Friction Circle' (on the edge of 'breaking loose'). 
Brake Aggressiveness 
Click on arrow to select how deep the driver goes into the turn before braking, then how hard they brake.  The more aggressive the rating, the closer the driver keeps the tires to the limits of the 'Friction Circle' (on the edge of 'breaking loose'). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.6.2 Calculate Performance Test Results 
The Circle Track Analyzer's calculated output is shown in  Figure 
2.37. This screen shows the track performance for the current vehicle.  From this screen you can: 

• 
Graph or plot the results versus time by clicking on the "Graph" menu command or the "Graph" icon.  Additional help is available from the Graph Screen.  

• 
Print the results on a printer by clicking on the "Print" menu command or the "Printer" icon.  Under the "Print" menu command, several other options open up for various types of report and printer options. 

• 
View the program's Notes about these results by clicking on the "Notes" button.  Notes are  

• 
useful for pointing out possible problems with the combination of specs you have selected.  A brief summary of the notes is given in the "Notes Summary" frame. 

• 
Display a history of the last 25 runs you have made by clicking on the "History" menu command.    

• 
Analyze the suspension by clicking on Analyzer Suspension.  This displays a screen showing several aspects of suspension motion and handling analysis.  Several report options are also available at this screen, some to give 'starting point' recommendations for springs, roll bar rates, stagger, etc.  These options are a powerful part of the Circle Track Analyzer's analysis. 

• 
Analyze the results in an Analysis Report by clicking on the "Analyze Perf" menu command. The analysis report gives tips on 

what to look for in the results to improve performance, or warning • of unsafe conditions to be aware of. 

• 
Return to the Main Menu by clicking on the "Back" menu command. 

• 
You can obtain definitions for most results by clicking on that area of the screen with the mouse.  For example, click on the column with MPH results, and a definition of MPH appears with a page # in the manual for more info.  This also works for the History report in the lower area of the screen, if it is currently being displayed. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Improvement Summary 
The Improvement Summary section compares the final results of the current run with those of the previous run.  This saves you from writing down Lap Times and MPHs to see how much effect a given modification has on performance. 
Lap Time 
Is the time for the car to travel around the track.  The results only show what happened from start of Turn #2, through the straight away, then through Turn #3.  The assumptions is that the other half of the track is exactly the same and those results are not calculated or shown. 
MPH (Final Velocity in Miles per Hour) 
Is the vehicle's average velocity around the track in miles per hour. 
Improvement 
Improvement is simply the difference between the Current Run and the Last Run for which performance was calculated.   
 If the improvement is a positive value: 
• 
The Current Run’s Lap Time was quicker (shorter) than the Last Run’s 

• 
The Current Run’s MPH was faster (greater) than the Last Run's 


Tabular Results 
The tabular results gives important vehicle and engine information at significant points during the run: 
• 
At the start of Turn #2. 

• 
At every time interval you have requested in the Running Conditions menu as Report Results Every...  spec in the Reports/Graphs section. 

• 
At the beginning of braking. 

• 
At the end of Turn #3. 


Occasionally, two of these conditions may occur very close together.  For example 8.0 seconds may occur a couple hundredths of a second before the start of braking.  In these cases, you may only get one reading, either the 8.0 second point or the start of braking.   
The following section defines each data column: 
Sec 
Shows the elapsed time since the start of Turn #2. 
The resolution of the time column can be increased to thousandths of a second by selecting .001 second increments in the Preferences menu  
MPH 
Is the vehicle's velocity in MPH. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Feet 
Is the distance the vehicle has traveled during the run, measured in feet. 
Accel Gs 
Is the vehicle's acceleration in Gs (1 G being 22 MPH/second).  If the tires are likely to loose traction, being overpowered by the available torque, the G value is followed by an S, and you should see Throttle% being less than 100%. 
Engine RPM 
Is the engine RPM. 
% Thrt 
Is the percent of the engine’s HP being allowed to be delivered to the clutch.  This will be reduced from 100% to prevent tire spin it tire spin is likely due to lack of tire traction. 
Turn # 
Since the program calculates only half the track (assuming the other half is exactly the same), two values are displayed.  When a dash (-) is displayed, the car is on the straight away. 
Curvature 
The radius of curvature for the line the program assumes the driver is driving, in feet.  The smaller the number, the sharper the turn at that point. 
Downforce 
Downforce is the force in pounds pressing the tires onto the track due to banking and aerodynamics, above normal vehicle weight.  If this value is less than 0, it will be shown as a negative (-) value. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Corner Gs 
Corner Gs is the cornering force which is throwing the car and the driver to the outside of the turn, measured in Gs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.7 Calculation Menus: 
The following section explains the user input for specs listed with Clc buttons (and the “Calculate”  power curve menu option in the Engine Specs menu).  These specs are ones where you can simply enter a value, or click on the Clc button and the program will present a menu of inputs which will calculate that particular parameter.  These menus are like computer “scratch pads” for calculating specs like Final Drive Ratio, Tire Circumference, etc. from other inputs. 
Notes: 
The starting values in each calculation menu are usually blanked out when the menu is opened.  If there is other information in the program to estimate what one of your input values will be, it may be loaded.  As shown in Figure 2.39, the 4 corner weights are already available based on the Vehicle Weight and Weight %s in the Vehicle Specs menu, and these values are loaded into the Calculation Menu.  You are free to change them to any other value. 
Once enough specs have been entered, the calculated value(s) at the top of the menu will be displayed.  This calculated value(s) will now be updated each time you change a spec.  If you want to use this calculated value, click on Use Calc Value. If the calculated value is within expected limits, it will be loaded into the original menu.  If you click on Cancel, you will be returned to the original menu with the original value unchanged.  If you click on Help, you will be given a general explanation of calculation menus, and a page # in this section for more info about the particular menu you are using. 
The input values or calculated values in any calculation menu have NO affect on calculated performance unless you load the Calculated value into the original menu. If you already know a spec in the form required by the program, then you have no need to use the calculation menu.  For example, if you know the Relative Humidity is 88%,  then you have no need to use a calculation menu to calculate Relative Humidity from , say, wet and dry bulb temperatures. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Example 
Assume you want to calculate a power curve for your car, but you know very little about the engine.  You could click on the Calculate menu item in the Engine Specs menu.  You will be presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.40. 
Engine Cubic Inches is already available from the Engine Specs menu, and this value is already loaded into the Calculation Menu.  Since the Cubic Inches of 355 is accurate for your engine, you leave it “as is”. 
Note that most inputs are disabled except Calc Based On and Engine Cubic Inches.  Select the Calc Based On choice from this Combo box.  Since you may not know what Volumetric Efficiency means,  select Engine Description. 
All specs except Vol Eff are now enabled (printed in black, not gray). All you have to do is pick a general description of your engine for the Desc. input.  Since you are using a 350 Holley 2 barrel carb with no restrictor plate, but “better than stock” heads pick “350 2BBL - Ported Heads” as the description. 
You would be ready to Use Calc Values if the RPM at Peak HP was correct.  From reading the comments in this menu, you see that a good estimate of RPM at Peak HP could be around 5500 for an engine with a 350 CFM 2 barrel carb. You now see the calculated Peak HP, Peak Torque and Peak Torque RPM displayed at the top of the menu. 
If you click on Cancel, you will return to the Engine Specs menu with the Power Curve specs unchanged.  If you click on Use Calc Value, you will be returned to the Engine Specs menu with a new power curve which includes the Calculated Peak HP, Peak Torque, Peak HP RPM and Peak Torque RPM shown in this menu. 
If you had changed the Cubic Inches from the 355 entered from the Engine Specs menu, you would also be asked if the new Cubic Inches should also be used in the Engine Specs menu also. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.7.1 Calc Power Curve 
This calculation is available from the Engine specs menu and lets you estimate an engine Power Curve.  Initiate this calculation by clicking on the “Calculate” menu item at the top of the Engine Specs Screen 

Peak HP Peak Torque, ft lbs Peak Torque RPM 
Are the values calculate from these inputs.  If you select Vol Eff, the Peak HP value is calculated using the following assumptions: 
• 
85% mechanical efficiency at RPM at HP Peak 

• 
35% thermal efficiency 

• 
Gasoline as the fuel with an energy content of 19,000 BTU/lb 

• 
Dry air density of .0764 lbs/cu ft (dry air at 29.92” and 60 degrees) . 


The other Power Curve specs are derived from Peak HP and RPM at HP Peak and an assumed shape of the torque curve based on the Cubic Inches. The RPM at HP Peak input at the bottom of the menu is always loaded back into the Engine specs menu. 
These calculations are based on power corrected to the standard aftermarket dyno correction factor of 29.92” mercury and 60 degrees dry air.  This is the standard assumption used by the Circle Track Analyzer for any power inputs. 
Calc Based On 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Volumetric Efficiency % 

• 
Engine Description 


Depending on your choice, certain inputs will now be enabled. 
Engine Cubic Inches 
Is the engine’s size in Cubic Inches. This is initially set to the Displacement in the Engine menu, but can be changed to anything you want. 
Vol Eff 
Is the engine's volumetric efficiency at the HP peak.  Volumetric efficiency means what is the amount of air which this engine pulls in one cycle compared to how much it could under “ideal” conditions.  Generally this is less than 100%, but can be up to 130% for highly tuned race engines, or up to 300% on supercharged or turbocharged engines. Generally, this is not the engine's peak volumetric efficiency (which usually occurs at the torque peak) but is close to it. 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box to select from the following choices: 
• 
65 Bad Production 

• 
75 Typ Production 

• 
80 Good Production 

• 
85 HiPerf Production 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

• 
90  Poor Street/Strip 

• 
95  Typ Street/Strip 

• 
100 Good Street/Strip 

• 
110 Good Race Engine 

• 
115 Very Good Race Engine 

• 
120 Excellent Race Engine 

• 
125 Unrestricted Winston Cup 


Desc 
Is a general description of your engine.  Note that the numbers for many descriptions are the CFM rating of the carburetor, not the cubic inches. 
RPM at HP Peak 
Is the RPM at which the HP peak occurs. This is initially set to the RPM at HP Peak in the Engine menu, but can be changed to anything you want.   
Note: Most any modification which increases HP will also increase RPM at HP Peak.  If you have no information about your RPM at HP Peak, use an RPM 500 RPM lower than your highest RPM on the track. 
2.7.2 Calc Displacement 
This menu is available by clicking on the Displacement Clc button in the Engine Specs menu.  When enough inputs have been entered, it shows Displacement in Cubic Inches (which can be transferred back to the Engine Specs menu by clicking on Use Calc Value), Cubic Centimeters and Liters. 
Calc Based On 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Bore and Stroke 

• 
CCs 

• 
Liters Depending on your choice certain inputs will now be enabled. 


Bore, inches 
Is the Bore for this engine.  Bore is the diameter of one cylinder. 
Stroke, inches 
Is the Stroke for this engine.  Stroke is the distance the piston travels from TDC to BDC. 
# Cylinders 
Is the number of cylinders in this engine.  For example, for a V-8 this would be 8. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Displacement in CCs 
Is the total engine displacement in cubic centimeters (CCs) that you want converted to cubic inches.  For example, for a 1000 CC motorcycle engine, enter 1000. 
Displacement in Liters 
Is the total engine displacement in liters that you want converted to cubic inches.  For example, for a 5.0L Mustang engine, enter 5. 
2.7.3 Calc Weight %s 
This menu is available by clicking on any of the CLC buttons by the Rear, Left or Cross Weight %s in the Vehicle Specs menu. When enough inputs have been entered, it shows 
Weight %s (which can be copied back to the Vehicle Specs menu by clicking on Use Calc Values), the Current Vehicle Weight in the Vehicle specs menu (for comparison), and the new Vehicle Weight based on the 4 corner weights entered into this menu. 
The weight measurements should be taken with the driver in the car, all fluid and fuel levels in race condition and on a very flat surface. 
Left Front Weight, lbs Right Front Weight, lbs Left Rear Weight, lbs Right Rear Weight, lbs 
Are the weights on the respective tire in lbs.  When you first open this menu, these are filled in with the corner weights which produce the Weight %s for the Vehicle Weight currently entered in the Vehicle Specs menu.   
If you use the new weight %s from this menu, and the New Vehicle Weight is significantly different from the current vehicle weight, you will be asked if you want to load the New Vehicle Weight into the Vehicle Specs menu also. 

2.7.4 Calc C.G. Height 
This menu is available by clicking on the C.G. Height Clc button in the Vehicle specs menu.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

The procedure to determine C.G. height requires one end of the car to be raised while accurately measuring the wheel weights on the other end of the car before and after the car is raised. The suspension must be blocked so the springs do not compress during the process. This can be done by replacing the shocks with solid links that maintain the vehicle’s free standing height. 
Raising a typical car about 20 inches (quite a lot) will only show a weight increase of 30-60 lbs for most cars.  Therefore, this process requires very precise weight measurements.  Some tips to improve the accuracy of the procedure include: 
• 
Wiggle the car slightly on the scale to ensure it always returns to the same weight. 

• 
The higher you raise the car, the more weight difference you will see and the more accurate results. 

• 
The test should be run with the driver and all fluid levels at race conditions. 

• 
Do the entire test more than once and average the C.G. height results. 


This procedure can be dangerous if not done with care and using good equipment.  Take the proper precautions, especially if you raise the car significantly. 
Wheelbase, in 
Wheelbase of the car in inches. 
Total Vehicle Weight, lbs 
The total weight of the vehicle, ideally with the driver and all fluid levels at race conditions. 
Total Front (Rear) Weight, lbs 
The weight on the front tires (or rear tires if the front of the car is raised) on level ground in pounds, before the car is raised. 
Raise Front or Rear 
Choose which end of the car is raised for this test, usually the rear. 
Front (Rear) Tire Radius, in 
The radius of the front tire (or rear tire if the front of the car is raised). 
Distance Raised, in 
The distance the one end of the car is raised, in inches. 
New Total Front (Rear) Weight, lbs 
The new weight on the front tires (or rear tires if the front of the car is raised) when the car has been raised. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.7.5 Calc Rear Axle Ratio 
This menu is available by clicking on the Rear Axle Ratio Clc button in the Vehicle specs menu. 
Type 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Ring & Pinion Gear Only (typical of most rear wheel drive rear axles) 

• 
Quick Change with 4.56 Ring & Pinion 

• 
Quick Change with 4.88 Ring & Pinion 

• 
Chain Drive Only (typical of go carts, most motorcycles, etc.) 

• 
Gear Reduction & Chain Drive (typical of motorcycles where there is a chain reduction between the engine and the transmission, and then there is the chain ratio between the transmission and rear axle) 


Depending on your choice certain inputs will now be enabled, hidden or changed. 
# Teeth, Pinion Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the smaller pinion gear (or drive gear which attaches to the driveshaft) in the rear axle.  If you selected Gear Reduction & Chain Drive as the Type, this is the # teeth on the sprocket or drive gear on the engine’s crankshaft.  In almost all cases, this number will be smaller than # Teeth Ring Gear. 
# Teeth, Ring Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the larger ring gear (or driven gear which attaches to the axle shafts through the differential) in the rear axle. If you selected Gear Reduction & Chain Drive as the Type, this is the # teeth on the sprocket or drive gear on the transmission input shaft or clutch shaft. In almost all cases, this number will be larger than # Teeth Pinion Gear. 

# Teeth, Drive Sprocket 
This is the number of teeth on the smaller drive sprocket on the engine or transmission for chain drive systems.  In almost all cases, this number will be smaller than # Teeth Wheel Sprocket. 
# Teeth, Wheel Sprocket 
This is the number of teeth on the larger driven sprocket on the wheel or axle for chain drive systems. In almost all cases, this number will be larger than # Teeth Drive Sprocket. 
Ring and Pinion Ratio 
This is the ring and pinion ratio for the quick change, usually 4.56 or 4.88, but you can change this to most any ratio. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

# Teeth, Top Spur Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the upper (top) spur gear in the quick change. 
# Teeth, Bottom Spur Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the lower (bottom) spur gear in the quick change. 
2.7.6 Calc Frontal Area 
This calculation is available from the Vehicle Specs menu and allows you to estimate a vehicle's frontal area. 
Track Width, inches 
Is the distance from the center of one front tire to the center of the other front tire.  This value is initially set to the Rear Track Width in the Body and Axle specs menu, but can be changed to most anything you want. 
Roof Height, inches 
The distance in inches from the ground to highest portion of the roof or vehicle in inches which extends nearly the full width of the vehicle.   
For example, for a truck with a roll bar behind the cab, measure to the top of the roll bar, but not to the top of one of the spot lights mounted on the bar. However, if so many lights are mounted on the bar that they are nearly continuous for the full width of the vehicle, it may be more accurate to then measure to the top of the spot lights. 

2.7.7 Tire Circumference Tread Width 
This calculation is available from the Wheel & Tire Specs menu and allows you to estimate either a front or rear wheel’s Tire Diameter and Tread Width for certain Tire Rating Types. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Note:  For all Rating Types except Rolling Radius, the Calc Tire Diameter is approximately 3% less than what you would calculate based on the exact dimensions.  This is to allow for some tire wear, deformation, and slip. 
Rating Type 
Click on this combo box for the following rating types: 
• 
P-Metric (ex P225-60-15) 

• 
Letter (ex G-60-15) 

• 
Rolling Radius, inches 

• 
Diameter, inches 


Depending on your choice, certain specs will become enabled. If you choose the P-Metric or Letter Type, you will also be able to calculate the Tread Width. 
P Metric Tire Size (ex 225) 
Identifies the tire's cross sectional width in millimeters and is also related to the tire's load carrying capacity. 
Letter Tire Size 

Identifies the tire's load carrying capacity.  Click on this combo box to select on of the letters.  This is an older rating system and there is more variation across manufacturer's. 
Aspect Ratio 
Is the ratio of tire cross sectional height to cross sectional width.  A 75 series tire has a height 75% as high as its cross sectional width, and is generally a tall tire.  A 50 series tire is a lower profile tire, more suited to cornering and performance. 
Figure 2.49 Rolling Radius
Wheel Rim Diameter 
Is the diameter of the wheel's rim. 
Rolling Radius, in 
Is the tire's radius, measured with the tire mounted on the car, with the tire on the ground with typical vehicle weight on  it. Radius is the distance from the center of the tire to the ground.  See Figure 2.49. 

Diameter, in 
Is the tire's diameter measured in inches.  Diameter is the distance across the tire. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

2.7.8 Estimated Traction Factors 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Traction Factor Clc button  in the Vehicle specs menu.  Click on the combo box to be presented with general choices describing traction, and the corresponding Traction Factor in %. This menu is different than other Calculation menus in that there is not calculation performed, but you are simply picking a Traction Factor from a list of descriptions.  
The Traction Factors in this list are very general.  You will probably have to fine tune this spec based on your vehicle's actual lap times.  The program can also determine Traction Factor with the Match My Lap Times command at the Main Menu. 
2.7.9 Calc Spring Rate 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Spring Rate Clc button  in the Front Suspension or Rear Suspension menu. 
Spring Location 
Click on this combo box to select which spring location you are calculating a spring rate for, either the Left spring, Right Spring or 
both springs. 
Type of Spring 
Click on the combo box for Type of Spring to change the inputs in this menu for the 4 basic types of springs: 
• 
Coil Springs 

• 
Leaf Springs 

• 
Solid Torsion Bars 

• 
Hollow Torsion Bars These inputs will be discussed in the 3 sections below 


Coil Springs 
Wire Diameter, in 
Is the diameter of the wire which makes up the coils, in inches.  Take this measurement carefully as it has a large impact on the results. 
Inside Diameter of Coil, in 

Is the inside diameter of the wire coils which makes up the spring, in inches.  The coil diameter ranges from 1.5 to 5 inches for most springs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Number of Active Coils 
Figure 2.52 Torsion Bar Specs
Is the number of active coils in the spring.  Usually the top and bottom

            Arm Length 
coils of a spring do not move (are not active) and do not contribute to the “springiness” of the spring.  Therefore the number of active or moving coils is usually 2 less than the total number of coils.  For example, for a spring with 12 coils, the Number of Active Coils would
                       Bar Outside Diameter 
be 10. 

                          Active Bar Length 

Leaf Springs 
# of Leaves at Center 
Is the number of individual leaves at the center of the leaf spring, where the axle attaches. For a single leaf this would be 1. 
# of Leaves at Ends 
Is the number of individual leaves within 2 inches of the front and rear mounting points on the vehicle frame.  Usually this is 1. 
Spring Length, in 
Is the length of the main leaf spring in inches, usually 20 to 60 inches. 
Thickness of One Leaf, in 
Is the average thickness of each individual leaf, in inches.  Take this measurement carefully, as it has a large impact on the results. 
Spring Width, in 
Is the average width of each leaf, in inches.  This usually ranges from 1 to 3 inches. 
Torsion Bars 
Torsion Bar Diameter, in 
Is the outside diameter of the section of the bar which is designed to twist, in inches.  Take this measurement carefully as it has a large impact on the results.  See Torsion Bar Length below. 
Torsion Bar Length, in 
Is the length of the bar which is designed to twist, which is usually the thinnest part of the bar.  See Figure 2.52. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Lever Arm Length, in 
Is the distance from the bar to where the bar attaches or rests on the axle.  See Figure 2.52.  For the Front Suspension, this is usually the length of the lower A Arm, from the center of the torsion bar to the ball joint. 
Bar Inside Diameter, in 
Is the inside diameter of the torsion bar if you have selected a Hollow Torsion Bar, in inches. 
2.7.10 Calc Roll Bar Rate 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Roll Bar Rate Clc button  in the Front Suspension menu. 
V4.0 has greatly enhanced this calculator, Appendix 6. 
Type of Bar 
Click on this combo box to select from the following 3 types of roll bars: 
• 
No Sway Bar 

• 
Solid Bar 

• 
Hollow Bar 


Bar Outside Diameter, in 

Is the outside diameter of the section of the bar which is designed to twist, in inches.  Take this measurement carefully as it has a large impact on the results. 
Figure 2.54 Roll Bar Measurements 
Production Style Bar                     Custom Style Bar
                            Bar Outside Diameter                           Bar Outside Diameter Arm Length 




                     Active Bar Length                     Active Bar Length 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Bar Inside Diameter, in 
Is the inside diameter of the torsion bar if you have selected a Hollow Roll Bar, in inches. 
Active Bar Length, in 
Is the length of the bar which is designed to twist, which is usually the thinnest part of the bar.  See Figure 2.54. 
Arm Length, in 
Is the distance from the bar to where the bar attaches to the suspension.  See Figure 2.54. 
2.7.11 Calc Dew Point, deg F 
Depending on your choice of Method of Recording Weather Data, you will be entering either Dew Point or Relative Humidity in the Running Conditions menu.  These humidity inputs at all these menus have a Clc button.  This is the Calculation Menu you will get if you are using Dew Point. 
Know Relative Humidity? 
If you know the relative humidity of the air and the air temperature, select Yes.  Otherwise select No to input Wet and Dry bulb temperatures from a psychrometer.  Depending on your choice the appropriate inputs are enabled. 
Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the relative humidity measurement was made.  For example, if the weather service or weather report gives a relative humidity of 56 % and a temperature of 68 degrees, use 68 degrees.   
Outside Rel Humidity, % 
Is the air's relative humidity as reported by a weather service or measured by humidity instruments. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F. This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken.  The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp. 
Wet Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F. The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is 

moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  Relative humidity or dew 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart.  The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. 
2.7.12 Relative Humidity, % 
Depending on your choice of Method of Recording Weather Data, you will be entering either Dew Point or Relative Humidity in the Running Conditions menu.  These humidity inputs at all these menus have a Clc button.  This is the Calculation Menu you will get if you are using Relative Humidity.      
Know Dew Point? 
If you know the dew point of the air and the air temperature, select Yes.  Otherwise select No to input Wet and Dry bulb temperatures from a psychrometer.  Depending on your choice the appropriate inputs are enabled. 
Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the Dew Point measurement was made. 
Dew Point, deg F 
Is the air's Dew Point in degrees F as reported by a weather service or measured by humidity instruments. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees 
F. This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken.  The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp. 
Wet Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees 
F. The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  Relative humidity or dew point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart.  The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8 Match My Lap Times 
The Circle Track Analyzer will automatically 'fine tune' certain critical specs to match a particular vehicle's lap times.  See Example 
4.2. The Match My Lap Times process consists of: 
1. 
You set all specs to match the vehicle you are building as close as practical.  This is very important for accurate results. 

2. 
Click on the Match My Lap Times button at the top of the Main Menu to bring up the Match My Lap Times menu shown in Figure 2.57.  

3. 
Fill in the Match My Lap Times menu with your vehicle's performance.  Then click on  OK (adjust veh. specs to match performance) to start the process. 

4. 
The program will adjust: 


• 
Engine Power Curve 

• 
Tire Traction Factor 

• 
Tire Type, if it needs more traction than 100% Traction Factor can provide 

• 
Driver Aggressiveness 

• 
Track Bank Angle 

• 
Track Infield Width To find a combination giving the closest match to the vehicle's performance.   



(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

If the program can not arrive at acceptable specs in 100 passes around the track, it will give you a notice.  You may then want to double check your entries in the Match My Lap Times menu or some of the other specs in the other menus. 
If the program does arrive at acceptable specs, you will be shown a summary of the new specs the program found and how close the program matched performance, as shown in Figure 2.58.  You can then load these specs into the menus for this vehicle. 
This process can save a good deal of "cut and try" on your part to get your vehicle specs adjusted.  Example 4.2 shows the Match My Lap Times process in more detail. 
Lowest Engine RPM in Turns 
Enter the lowest RPM you see in the turns.  This gives the program an idea of how slow the car must go to make the turn. 
Highest RPM Before Braking 
Enter the highest RPM you see immediately before you brake.  This gives the program an idea of how for you get into the corner before you brake, and some idea of the shape of the power curve. 
Lap Time 
Enter the car’s lap time for this particular track. 
Adjust Power Curve if Needed 
Pick Yes and the program will not only adjust vehicle specs and track specs, but also the engine power curve to match lap times.  This is recommended when you do not have a dyno curve for the engine.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Chapter 3 Output 
The Circle Track Analyzer provides several ways to view and output the test results, including: 
• 
Tabular, calculated Test Results displayed on the screen.  Check Section 2.6 for definitions of Test Results. 

• 
Analyze Suspension is a powerful, graphical suspension analysis tool 

• 
Analysis Report giving tips, warning of safety issues, etc. 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output or reports or graphs 

• 
Vehicle Library for recording sets of vehicle specs for later use 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Figure 3.2 Additional Output Options Click here or here to graph these results 
Click here or here to print these results 
Click here to analyze the suspension as the car goes 
around the track, as described in Section 3.6. Click here to create Analysis Report (giving performance tips) as described in Section 3.1 
Click here for History Log options Click here for help on Test Results 
Click here to view and/or edit the Vehicle Comments, or the Engine, Front Suspension or Rear Suspension comments 
Click here to return to the Main Menu 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.1 Analyze Perf. Reports 
When calculated test results are displayed on the screen, you can obtain an Analysis Report by clicking on Analyze Perf. in the menu bar. The Analysis report consists of 1-3 pages of suggestions for improving performance, safety warnings, etc. concerning the performance results calculated. See Figure 3.3 and 3.4 for examples. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


IMPORTANT: The Circle Track Analyzer  can NOT anticipate all UNSAFE and poor performing situations. Do NOT rely only on the Analysis report to point out problems and SAFETY HAZARDS. You must use your own judgment, expert advice from experienced engine builders and the manufacturer of the components. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.2 Graphs 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph button or the Graph name in the menu bar as shown in Figure 3.1.  Figure 3.5 shows a typical graph and a descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 
Figure 3.5 Basic Graph Screen Items Command buttons perform action as pictured with 1 click of mouse. Menu bar provides for several graph commands and options. Graph Title: change by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/Legend. Name of current Engine File Commands to graph the current test results with past test results. Last is the previous test results, History are up to 6 results from the History Log. 

Graph Legend, which describes the data graphed. This includes Name of test results, Type of Data. You can also click on Data Type names and the corresponding data line will flash. This is useful to find a particular line when several are graphed. Names in the Legend can be changed by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/ 
Horizontal X axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily 
changed as described in this section. Grid lines. The style or elimination of grid lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Grid Style. 
Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 
Vertical Y axis, the scaling of which can be changed as described in this section. 
There are 2 basic types of test data which can be graphed: 
• 
MPH 

• 
Accel Gs 

• 
Engine RPM 

• 
% Throttle 

• 
Downforce 

• 
Cornering Gs Vs (on X axis), either: 

• 
Time in Seconds 

• 
Distance if Feet 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

There are 3 basic types of tests which can be graphed: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results displayed in the Test Results screen, for the current Vehicle specs. 

• 
Last test results. These are the test results from the previous calculation.  By comparing the current calculated results to the last results, you can easily watch how each modification has effected performance. 

• 
Test results from the History Log. The History Log is a list of 25 tests, some of which you have specified you want saved long term, some of which are simply some of the last tests you have run.  


Figure 3.7 History Log (see Section 3.5 for more details) 
Data_To_Graph 
You can switch between data types as shown in Figure 3.6. 
Figure 3.6 Switching between Data Types Click on Data_to_Graph for drop down menu. Then select type of data to graph, and what to graph against (time or distance for the X axis). Your current choices are shown with check marks. 

Graphing Current, Last and History Log Test Results 
The Current and Last Test Results were defined earlier.  The History Log is explained in some detail in Section 3.5 starting on page 112.  This section will explain how to graph test results for tests in the History Log. 
Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 

• 
Miscellaneous Format Options to change the appearance of the graph. 


These are discussed in this next section. 
Click in this column to show Yes or remove Yes.  Tests marked Yes will be graphed. 
This column shows name program will display in graph Legend for this test. Click on name to change it. 
Click on the History Button or the History menu item todisplay the History Log. 
Choose a ‘Graph’ option from the menu bar to close the History Log and graph the tests identified by the menu option you pick. 
Click and drag slide bar to display entire History Log. Some tests marked Yes may be at the bottom of the Log and not be visible now. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


Figure 3.8 Printing Graphs Clicking on the Printer button is the same as clicking on File and then Print. Click on File to display the two print menu options 

Click here to print the graph with solid lines. This works best for printing graphs in color. 
Click here to print the graph with dashed lines. This works best for printing graphs in black and white, where different dashed line styles let you distinguish between different graphs. 

Click here change the printer or printer driver, 
page orientation, etc. as shown below. 

Windows standard Printer Setup menu 
Printing 
Figure 3.8 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  It also shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 




Figure 3.9 Cursor Features and Commands Click here to turn Cursor On 
Click here to turn Cursor OffCursor line, 
usually pink or Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or 
green, right. Hold down the <shift key> while clicking
depending on these buttons and the cursor moves farther. 
background You can also enable the cursor by clicking onl View, then Turn Cursor On. 

The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 
The X value of the cursor is shown here, in this case the RPM of 7.5 seconds 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph line at a data point. This also provides a quick way to move the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) If you click on a graph line in between data points, the cursor will not appear. 


Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places.  See Figure 3.9 for explaining the use of the cursor. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Figure 3.10 Menu to Edit Title and Legend 
This is the list of Standard names the program uses unless you click on the Use New Titles button below. Select (click on) a Standard name you want to change. The Standard Name appears in the edit box, along with the current New name if there is one. Once you have selected a name from this list (that row will be highlighted) it is easier to use the up and down arrow keys to select the next item to edit than clicking the item with the mouse. 
This is the list of New names the program will use if you click on Use New Titles. If a title in the List of New Names is blank, the program will use the Standard name. 

Standard name from 
row selected. 
New name for you to edit. Other options include clicking on the Copy Std Name to New or Blank Out New Name buttons. 
Click here to close this menu and use the New names you have entered. Where New names have been left blank, the Standard name will be used. 
Changing titles and legend names 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure 
3.10which will allow you to do this. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph. The Engine Analyzer has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures 3.11 and 3.12. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Figure 3.12 Menu to Specify Graph Axes Scales 

The current scale limits are loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. Either the left (Time) or right (Distance) section will be enabled depending on what is graphed on the X axis. 
Click on OK to have the graph redrawn to these new scale limits 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Click on the Format menu item to be presented with several options which will be briefly discussed here. 
Line Style Figure 3.13 Format Options 
Click on Line Style to change the thickness of the graph lines. 
Grid Style 
Click on Grid Style to change or omit the drawing of grid lines on the graph. 

Back Color 
Click on Back Color to change the background color of the graph from white, black or gray. 
V4.0 in Appendix 6 has greatly enhance these Graph Options 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.3 Vehicle (& file) Library 
The Circle Track Analyzer allows you to save a set of vehicle specifications to the Vehicle Library under a name of your choosing.  You can then open these vehicles out of the Vehicle Library in the future for comparison or modification.  The Open window is shown on the next page with explanations. 
Note:  You can also save sets of Engine, Front Suspension, and Rear Suspension specs to their own separate libraries.  This is done very similarly as with the Vehicle Files, except you click on File, then Open from the individual Engine, Front Suspension, and Rear 
Suspension menus. 
Figure 3.14 Vehicle Library Options Click on Open button (or ‘File (vehicle)’, then ‘Open’) to display Vehicle Library shown here. (Save option also available after clicking on ‘File (vehicle)’.) 
Click on Save button to save current Vehicle specs to Library 

Total # Vehicles in Library 
Name of chosen Vehicle (currently highlighted in Vehicle List 
Preview of 
Vehicle chosen 
Click and drag slide bar to view all vehicles in list 
Single click on vehicle to choose it for preview. Double click to immed­iately open it.
Click here to 

Click here to bring up standardopen the chosen 

Windows File Open screen, to let youVehicle open a file in most any folderClick here to delete (directory) and disk drive.
chosen Vehicle. 
Click here to close the Vehicle Library with No changes (without opening a vehicle) Click here to bring up on screen 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Open a Vehicle File 
To open a vehicle file saved in the Library, either: 
• 
Click on the Open button 

• 
Click on the “File (vehicle)” menu item and then on the “Open Vehicle” options from the list. 


You will obtain the window shown on the previous page.  Single click on one of the vehicles in the list, or click and drag the slide button on the right side of the list to display more vehicles.  Once you single click on a vehicle, it is now the Chosen Vehicle File and a preview of the vehicle is given in the Preview section.  If the file you chose was not a valid Circle Track Analyzer file, the program will tell you and you can not choose it. 
Once a vehicle has been chosen, you can delete it by clicking on the Delete button, or Open it by clicking on the Open button in this window.  You can also click on a different vehicle to Preview it or close this window and return to the Main Menu without choosing a new vehicle file. 
If you are sure of the vehicle you want to open, you can simply double click on it from the Vehicle List.  This opens the vehicle without a preview and closes this menu. 
Figure 3.15 Engine File Options 
Click on File in the Engine, Front Suspension or Rear Suspension menus to Open a set of saved specs, or to save the current set of specs in just that screen. This allows you to build libraries of Engines, Front Suspensions and Rear Suspensions for easily building other complete vehicles in the future. 
• 
New blanks out the current specs and comments. 

• 
Open Example opens a library of example specs provided by Performance Trends. 

• 
Open Saved opens a library of specs you have saved. 

• 
Save saves the current specs to the same 


Current Engine File Name name as these specs are currently called. 
• Save As saves the current specs to a new name that you will enter. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Save a Vehicle File 
Before we discuss saving an engine file, it is important for you to understand how the program opens and uses vehicle files.  When you open a vehicle from the Vehicle Library, you are only using a copy of the vehicle.  The original vehicle file is kept in the library.   
As you make changes to the vehicle, they are only made to this copy.  The original file is not changed.  If you want to delete your changes, you can simply open a fresh, unchanged copy of the original vehicle file from the Library.  If you want to keep your changes, you must save them. This can be done by clicking on the Save button.  You are also asked if you want to save your changes whenever you open  a new vehicle, and the program has detected you have made changes to the current file. 
To save a Vehicle File, you will be presented with the Save Window as shown below.  The program suggests a new vehicle name which is the same as the current vehicle name shown at the top of the Main Menu.  If you want to save your changes to the same name, simply click on OK.  This will update the current vehicle file with your latest changes. 
Figure 3.16 Saving Vehicle File Options 


Click on Save button to bring up this Save menu. 

Click here to save specs to New Vehicle name shown 

New name to save vehicle specs to. Leave unchanged and click OK to save to the current vehicle name. Click on name in box to change it, then click OK to save it to the new name. 
Name of current vehicle file you are working with 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

If you want to save the current set of vehicle specs with your changes to a new name (and leave the current vehicle file in the Library unchanged), then click on the suggested file name and modify it as you want.  For example, in the window shown on the next page, you may want to add -2 to the current name MUSTANG to create MUSTANG-2 to indicate this is the 2nd revision of MUSTANG.  This is the safest way to make changes, because you can always return to an earlier version and see what you had done. 
Certain file names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names with more than 3 characters to the right or 8 characters to the left of a period (.) . 

• 
Names over 11 characters long (12 characters if one is a period). 

• 
Names which include the characters: 

/  \  [  ]  :  |  <  >  +  =  ;  ,  *  ? or spaces 

• 
Names with lower case letters.  These letters will be converted to upper case once the file is saved. 


Vehicle files are saved in the CTADATA subdirectory in the CTA20 subfolder (subdirectory) under PERFTRNS.PTI folder (directory). Unlike earlier DOS Circle Track Analyzer programs, you can copy Windows Circle Track Analyzer files from programs on other computers to this folder (directory) and they will be found by the program.  
The method of saving Engine, Front Suspension and Rear Suspension files is exactly the same as complete Vehicle Files, except that you access the Save menu by clicking on File at the top of these individual menus, as shown in Figure 3.15. These files are saved to the ENGINE, FRONT or REAR folders (directories), 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.4 Printer Output 
The Circle Track Analyzer can print the tabular test results for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer button.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.17 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the top for boxes.  All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 
Figure 3.17 Printer Command and Menu of Printer Output Options 
The Windows Printer Setup option lets you choose the printer or printer driver being used by Windows and also the page orientation. 
Click on Print or the Printer Button for the Printout Options menu shown to the right. 



Include Vehicle Specs 
Select this options if you want all the current Engine specs, Vehicle specs, etc printed with the results.  This will add 1 or more pages to the printed report. 
Include Vehicle Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the complete vehicle printed with the results.  These are the comments which appear on the Main Screen.  Requesting this option may require some results to be printed on a second page. 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular report you send to the printer.  These "report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like modifications, weather conditions, etc.  Requesting this option may require some results to be printed on a second page. 
Include Eng & Susp Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the Engine, Front Suspension and Rear Suspension printed with the results. Requesting this option may require some results to be printed on a second page. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

V4.0 in Appendix 6 has greatly enhance these Print Options 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.5 History Log 
The Circle Track Analyzer remembers the results and the Vehicle specs which produced those results for up to the last 25 runs you 
have made.  This can 
Figure 3.18 History Log and Options
be a very handy comparison of one run to another and saves you the trouble of making notes on pieces of paper. It is also handy to be able to go back to some condition which gave very good performance, but you don’t remember why or what the specs were. Figure 3.18 shows the History Log  and options.  
The History Log can be displayed from either the Test Results screen shown in Figure 
3.18 above or in the Graph screen as shown in Figure 3.19 on the next page.  The Log is 

Test Title 
Click on Test Title and you are asked if you want to retrieve the specs which produced these results. Answer Yes and the specs are retrieved.  Answer No and you can then change the Test Title.  This is useful for making notes about this particular run, modifications you made, etc. 

Graph? 
Click in this column to have a Yes inserted or removed.  All test rows with a Yes will be graphed if you click on Graph These Tests in the menu bar.  This column is only visible in the History Log displayed in the Graph screen. See Figure 3.20. 
Click on Test Title to change the Title or retrieve the specs which produced these results. 
History Log is displayed below the columns of test results. 
Click and move slide bar to display all 25 tests in the History Log. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Graph Title 
Is the title which will appear in the graph legend for this test.  The program creates a simple title based on the Engine File Name and the time the test was run, but you can click on this name and the program will ask you to enter a new name, perhaps something like “3 in Stagger”. This column is only visible in the History Log displayed in the Graph screen.  See Figure 3.20.  The first time  you  type in a Test Title, the Graph Title will be changed to the first 16 letters of the Test Title. 
Save? 
Click in this column to have a Yes inserted or removed.  All tests move toward the bottom of the log as new tests are run, and eventually fall off the list.  However, tests with a Yes move to the bottom, but do not fall off the list and are saved on the list until you remove the Yes in this column.   
Tip:  If you want to save a test, but do not necessarily want it on the History Log,, click on it to retrieve it and the engine specs which produced it.  At the Main Screen, make notes of what this test and engine are.  Then save it to the Vehicle Library.  Although the test results are not available for graphing, you can open this engine file and recalculate the test results at any time in the future. 
Lap Ft 
Is the Lap Distance in feet for these results.  This is useful for determining if you are making an “apples and apples” comparison.  If the Lap Ft is different, then you should expect different lap times. 
Infield 
Is the Infield Width in feet for these results. This is useful for determining if you are making an “apples and apples” comparison.  If the Infield Width is different, then you should expect different lap times. 
MnRPM/ MxRPM 
Is the minimum (or lowest) engine RPM in the turns. / Is the maximum (or highest) engine RPM right before braking. 
Lap Time 
Is the Lap Time is seconds. 
Imp. 
Is the improvement in Lap Time for this test compared to the test below it, usually the previous test run.  If Lap Time is longer, the Imp. will be negative. 
MPH 
Is the average MPH for this test. 
Imp. 
Is the improvement in MPH for this test compared to the test below it, usually the previous test run.  If MPH is lower (slower), the Imp. will be negative. 
Car Length 
Is the improvement in Lap Times expressed in car lengths.  The program assumes about 20 feet for a car length. If the Lap Time is longer (slower), the Car Length will be negative. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

3.6 Analyze Suspension 
A powerful feature of the Circle Track Analyzer is its ability to predict suspension movement, cornering forces, performance and weight transfer as the vehicle goes around the track.  This information is displayed in the Suspension Analysis screen shown if Figure 
3.21. You obtain this screen by clicking on Analyze Suspension at the Test Results screen. 
Check Appendix 5 for significant, new options/outputs for this feature. 
Figure 3.21 History Log and Options 
Front Suspension shows how suspension is moving as vehicle travels around track. Graphic showing
Menu commands Click here to
estimated RPM, throttle
for various options. 
close this
and braking position. 

Estimated spring compression (jounce) or elongation (rebound, reported as a negative ‘-’ number). 
Tire load in pounds, and bar graph of tire load. Black line in bar graph indicates static load. 
Static (car standing still) and Dynamic Weight %s. 
The “dot” shows the current vehicle acceleration combination. 
Friction Circle shows how much of the available tire traction is being used (how hard the tires are being pushed). 
Track postion shown with the MPH, distance and time for the current position. 
The only way to return to the program from this screen is by clicking on the [X] button at the upper right corner, or the icon button at the upper left corner. (In Windows 3.1, click on the [-] button in the upper left corner, then select Close.) 
This screen is very important to understand how suspension changes will affect suspension motion, tire camber, tire corner rates, roll center motion, all of which are critical for handling and fast lap times.  From this screen you can:  
• 
Watch the car's performance from the current Test Results. 

• 
Compare the current Test Results to a Baseline condition, some previous Test Results you told the program to save as a Baseline.  Baseline conditions are printed or drawn in pink so you can easily see the difference between the Baseline and the Current conditions. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Note that Baseline conditions can only be displayed if the current Test Results and Baseline results are for the same length track and same infield width.  This is because the Baseline and current conditions are compared and displayed for the same place on the track. 
Another important feature of this screen is the Reports option.  Reports give summary analysis of the suspension and provide some 'starting point' recommendations for this suspension setup on this particular track. 
This screen is divided into 4 sections: 
• 
Front Suspension (upper left corner) 

• 
Total Vehicle (upper right corner) 

• 
Track Position (lower left corner) 

• 
Friction Circle (middle bottom) 


These are discussed below: 
Front Suspension (upper left corner) 
This section shows how camber, instant centers, car dive and roll, and roll center change as the car goes around the track.  Tire camber is critical to getting the most traction out of your tires which is critical to vehicle handling. 
If you are also displaying the Baseline condition, the Baseline Roll, Dive and Cambers are printed in pink, and the Baseline Roll Center position is drawn as a Pink dot. 
Total Vehicle (upper right corner) 
This section shows how each corner of the car is working: how much weight is on each tire and how much each spring is compressed (from jounce) or elongated (from rebound).  The tire weights are displayed with the bar graphs for easy comparisons. 
Static and dynamic Weight %s are displayed in the center of the screen.  Static Weight %s are what you input in the Vehicle Specs menu.  Dynamic Weight %s are based on the actual corner weights as the car goes around the track.  These depend on aerodynamic downforce, cornering forces, weight transfer, etc. 
The top of the screen shows bar graphs for the % Brake and Throttle the program assumes the driver is using.  A tachometer is displayed showing how RPM is changing, with the actual RPM reading printed below. 
If you are also displaying the Baseline, Baseline spring compression and tire weights are printed in pink, Baseline tire weights are graphed as a pink outline bar, and Baseline RPM is drawn on the tach and printed. 
Track Position (lower left corner) 
This section shows the car's approximate position on the track.  The results always start at the beginning of Turn #2, and that is where the Yellow line (indicating the distance the car has traveled) also starts.  The position is only approximate because the track is drawn the same even if the actual track is long and narrow (tight) or short and wide (open). 
Printed inside the track is the MPH, distance in Feet, and elapsed time. 
If you are also displaying the Baseline condition, the Baseline MPH, Feet, and Time are also printed.  Below the track an estimate is made of how far ahead or behind the Baseline condition is from the current Test Results in Car Lengths. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Friction Circle (middle bottom) 
A Friction Circle is a useful way to analyze how hard the tires are working in all 3 directions:  accelerating, cornering, and braking. 
For example, if a tire has enough traction to provide 1 G of acceleration, it probably also has enough traction to provide 1 G of braking and 1 G of cornering. If the driver has enough engine and braking to accelerate and brake at 1 G, and if the driver was using all the available traction from this tire, you would see his current acceleration "dot" somewhere on the 1 G circle.  Any time the car was not on the 1 G circle it would be an indication that the car was capable of more performance than what the driver was asking of it. 
Things the would improve overall vehicle traction will increase the G level which can be sustained on the vehicle, and therefore increase the G level you will see on the Friction Circle.  This would include: 
• 
More downforce, due to either banking or aerodynamic downforce. 

• 
“Stickier” tires. 

• 
Keeping the weight between all 4 tires as even as possible (not necessarily the case for dirt cars). 

• 
Four wheel drive for accelerating. 

• 
Optimum camber (however this is not simulated in this version of Circle Track Analyzer). 


If you are also displaying the Baseline condition, the Baseline acceleration is graphed in pink. 
Menu Options 
Click on 'Options' to allow extension lines to be drawn or not drawn in the front suspension layout screen, or to display or not display the Baseline conditions.  Other options including slowing down or speeding up the Continuous display of the results, or renaming the Baseline condition. 
Click on 'Print' to print this screen, or change the Windows Printer Setup. 
Click on 'Continuous' for a continuous display of the vehicle moving around the track.  Click on 'Single Step Ahead' or 'Single Step Back' to advance the results ahead or back 1 data point.  This allows for more detailed analysis and understanding of the results. 
When you leave this screen you are asked if you want to save the current Test Results as the Baseline.  This is the only way to change the Baseline Condition. 
Reports 
One important Menu Option is the ability to produce Suspension Analysis reports, of 4 types: 
• 
Suspension Calculations 

• 
Suspension Calculations with Comments 

• 
‘Rule of Thumb’ Suggestions 

• 
‘Rule of Thumb’ Adjustments 


These are discussed below. 
Suspension Calculations Suspension Calculations with Comments 
These reports show calculations concerning the suspension specs (some not found anywhere else in the program) like Roll Stiffness Distribution, Roll Stiffness in degrees per G, etc.  Table 3.1  gives definitions of these calculations.  The report “with Comments” includes the comments for the Front and Rear Suspensions which you’ve entered at those screens. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Table 3.1 Suspension Calculations Definitions 
Front Suspension  
Spring Rate, lb/in  Front Spring Rate from the Front Suspension Specs menu. See pages 31-40.  
Motion Ratio  Motion Ratio for Spring is the ratio between an inch of spring motion to wheel motion. This ratio is corrected for the instant center location, which makes this calculation more accurate and possibly different than what other programs would calculate.  
Motion Ratio Squared  Motion Ratio squared for Spring. See Motion Ratio above.  
Spring Angle, deg  Spring's installation angle. See Front Suspension Specs Definitions. See pages 31-40.  
Wheel Rate, lb/in  Spring rate at tire. See list of Definitions in Front Suspension Specs Screen. See pages 31-40.  
Instant Center Height, in  Height of Instant center of that side of the suspension.  See Front Suspension Specs Screen Definitions. See pages 31­40.  
Instant Center Arm from Tire, in  Distance from the tire's centerline to the Instant center of that side of the suspension. See Front Suspension Specs Screen Definitions. See pages 31-40.  
Scrub Radius, in  Tire's scrub radius.  See Front Suspension Layout Screen Definitions. See pages 31-40.  
Roll Bar Rate, lb/in  Is the Roll Bar Rate from the Front Suspension Specs menu. See pages 31-40.  
Roll Bar Motion Ratio  Is the motion ratio of the roll bar, or what fraction of the tire's motion at its centerline does the roll bar move. Like the spring's motion ratio, this also corrects for the instant center location of the suspension.  
Roll Bar Motion Ratio Squared  The square of the Roll Bar Motion Ratio.  This is the fraction of the Roll Bar Rate which is actually felt at the tires.  
Roll Bar Rate at Tires, lb/in  Roll Bar Rate times Roll Bar Motion Ratio Squared, or the effective roll bar rate.  
Natural Frequency, cycles/sec  Is the number of cycles per second the car naturally wants to bounce at. If you removed the shock and jumped on that particular corner of the car, this is the number of bounces you would see in 1 second. Soft sedans have lower frequencies of 1 to 1.3 where race cars have frequencies of 1.8-2.2. Frequencies much higher than this would make the driver's eyes blur and are extremely uncomfortable to the human body.  
Roll Center Height, in  Roll Center Height.  See Front Suspension Layout Screen Definitions. See pages 31-40.  
Roll Center Offset, in  Roll Center X location.  See Front Suspension Specs Definitions. See pages 31-40.  
Front Roll Stiffness, ft lbs/deg  Is the amount of torque (ft lbs) applied to the car it takes for the front springs to allow the car to roll 1 degree. A real car will roll more than this due to compliance in tires, suspension members, bushings, etc.  
% Front Stiffness from Roll Bar  The % of the Front Roll Stiffness contributed by the roll bar.   
% Total Vehicle Roll Stiffness  The % of the Total Vehicle's Roll Stiffness contributed by the front suspension. This usually ends up in the range of 75­85% for front engine/rear drive cars.   
Rear Suspension  
Spring Rate, lb/in  Rear Spring Rate from Rear Suspension Specs menu.  
Natural Frequency, cycles/sec  Natural frequency of the rear suspension.  See Front Suspension definitions above.  
Roll Center Height, in  Height of the Rear Roll Center. Most all cars are designed with the Rear roll center higher than the front, for improved  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

stability.  
Rear Roll Stiffness, ft lbs/deg  The roll stiffness of the rear suspension.  See Front Suspension definitions above.  
% Total Vehicle Roll Stiffness  The % of the Total Vehicle's Roll Stiffness contributed by the rear suspension. This usually ends up in the range of 15­25% for front engine/rear drive cars.   
Total Vehicle  
Vehicle Roll Stiffness, ft lbs/deg  The roll stiffness of the front and rear suspension.  See Front Suspension definitions above.  
Roll axis to CG ht Moment Arm, in  Is the height of the CG above the roll axis at the CG (center of gravity) location. This is the lever which acts to roll the car as the car corners. The greater this Moment Arm, the more the car will roll. If this height is 0, the car will not roll at all (at least from spring jounce/rebound). See Figure 3.22.  
Level ground roll rate, deg/G  Is the amount of body roll in degrees produced from spring jounce/rebound when the car corners at 1 G on level ground. The actual car will roll more due to compliance in the tires, suspension members, bushings, etc.  
CG Location:  
Distance Behind Front Axle, in  Is the distance toward the rear from the front axle (line joining the center hubs of the left and right front wheels) where the CG is located based on the Weight% Rear in the Vehicle Specs menu. See Figure 3.22.  
Distance from Vehicle Centerline, in  Is the distance from the car's tire track centerline where the CG is located based on the Weight % Left in the Vehicle Specs menu. Note that this Centerline may not be the same as the Drivetrain Centerline, on which your suspension measurements are based.  

‘Rule of Thumb’ Suggestions 
This report gives some recommendations for spring rates and front roll bar rate (based on the desired wheel rates and knowing the motion ratios and spring installation angles).  It also compares your car's roll center height and scrub radius with typical values, and recommends a starting point for rear tire stagger and cross weight.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

As the beginning of the report states, these recommendations are based on general racer experience and not detailed computer analysis of your particular set of suspension specs or suspension layout.  You will likely have to adjust these recommendations to work with your particular car and driving style. 
This report gives recommendations for spring rates, assuming the front and rear springs will be installed into the same suspension geometry and angle as is currently specified.  If you are going to change the geometry or installation angles of the springs, do this first.  Then obtain a new report of recommendations. 
‘Rule of Thumb’ Adjustments 
This report is a handy guide, listing vehicle modifications to correct various handling problems.  The modifications are listed with those usually having the most effect first.  This report is exactly the same each time it is printed and is based on racer and chassis builder experience.  It is NOT based on computer analysis of your particular vehicle or suspension specs. 
Check Appendix 5 for significant, new options, reports and calculated outputs for this feature. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Chapter 4 Examples 
Each of these examples become progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated. 
The results shown in these examples may be somewhat different than what you obtain with your particular version of the program That is due to minor upgrades in the calculations in later versions. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




Example 4.1 Changing Axle Ratio 
Example 4.1 will be fairly simple to get you started.  We will simulate a common modification, changing the Rear Axle Ratio. We will see the effect on Lap Times, MPH, engine RPM range, etc. 
First, start the Circle Track Analyzer program following the procedure in Section 1.4 by either: 
• 
Clicking on the Circle Track Analyzer v2.0 icon in the Perf. Trends program group (Windows 3.1) 

• 
Clicking on Start, Programs, Perf. Trends, then Circle Track Analyzer v2.0 (Windows 95 and 98) 

• 
Clicking on the CTA.EXE (CTA) program under the CTA20 directory (folder) under the PERFTRNS.PTI directory (folder) using File Manager (Windows Explorer).  (Terms in parentheses are for Windows 95 and 98.) 


You will be shown the Circle Track Analyzer’s Main Menu, Figure 4.1.  Notice at the top of the screen that the current Vehicle file is a LATEMODL. Although these specs may not match your car, follow along to see how to use the program’s many features. 
If it is not LATEMODL.355 (late model with 355 Chevy) or if you think the current car’s specs have been changed, you can Open up this Vehicle file by clicking on the Open button as shown in Figure 4.2.  Open the Vehicle file LATEMODL.355 shown in Figure 4.2.  If you  have made any changes to the vehicle which originally appeared at the top of the Main Menu, the program will first ask you if you want to save these changes. Answer No and you will be returned to the Main Menu with the LATEMODL.355 specs loaded into the program. 
Click on the different categories of vehicle specs or the Running Conditions button on the Main Menu. Since we want to see the effect of changing the axle ratio on this vehicle, we first need to get a "baseline" test.  A "baseline" is a performance test before the modification.  Therefore, if you examine the contents of any component menus, leave all current values as they are.   
Click on the Running Conditions button and you will now be shown the Running Conditions screen.  This screen gives the conditions for calculating performance like track weather, the track specs, driver preferences, etc.  For now, leave these values as they are. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Proceed with the calculations by clicking on the Running Conditions button in this menu. 
The program will display  the Calculation Progress indicator as calculations progress.  When the calculations are finished, the performance results will look like Figure 4.3.  You now see a screen with columns of numbers describing the LATEMODL.355's run around half the track.  The program assumes the other half is exactly the same as the first half, so only calculates half a lap.  At the top in the right corner is a summary of the run and any improvement between the current run and the last run.  The Last run can be from the last time you ran the program.  (The program remembers results from different sessions, between computer shutdowns and start ups.) 
Figure 4.2 Vehicle Library Name of Vehicle the program is currently working with. The current specs may have been changed and be different than the Vehicle in Library of the same name. 

Click on the vehicle you want to Open to see a Preview. Double click to Open immediately. 
Preview of chosen (highlighted) vehicle. 
Click here to show Vehicle Library 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Note the Lap Time of 16.16 seconds with a MPH of 83.5 at the top of the report with the current 6.20 axle ratio.  In the columns of numbers in the last row you see a time of 8.08 sec, exactly half of the lap time of 16.16.  This is because the program only calculates results fro half a lap, assuming the other half of the lap would be exactly the same. 
Other important things to look for in the Test Results screen include: 
Notice that the Notes Summary is pointing out a couple of things:  Low Lift Coef. and Engine RPM High. If you click on the Notes button, you obtain the screen shown in Figure 4.4.  These notes can be useful for understanding your performance and safety considerations. 
To obtain a graph of these results, click on the Graph button or Graph menu item.  The program will present a graph  similar to that shown in Figure 4.5 of Engine RPM.  If you do not see a graph of Engine RPM, click on Data Types at the top of the graph and select Engine RPM. 
Since the Notes pointed out Low Lift Coefficient, you might want to try the Downforce Graph Data Type.  Here you can see how much downforce in pounds the Low Lift Coefficient is generating on this track.  Note that track banking also generates 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.5 Engine RPM Graph Click here for other options 


Click here to change data to be graphed 
Although results are calculated and reported for only half a lap, graphs are shown for the full lap. 



Figure 4.6 Graph of Downforce Click on Data_To_Graph, then select data type and data type for X axis, seconds or feet. Check mark shows current selections. 

Downforce is a minimum on the straightaway, because banking effect in turns is minimum. However, program still assumes banking on straightaway, which reduces 
f 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Changing the Rear Axle Ratio 
Now for the good part; lets change the gear ratio and see what happens.  Get back to the Main Menu by clicking on Back in the menu bar (or pressing <ESC>) at the graph screen (Figure 4.5), then clicking on Back (or pressing <ESC>) again at the tabular Test Results screen (Figure 4.3). 
Click on Vehicle to bring up the menu shown in Figure 4.7.  Because the Note in the program said the Engine RPM was high, lets try a lower axle ratio, which will reduce the RPM range.  Lets try a 5.9 axle ratio as shown in Figure 4.7.  With wrenches, money, parts 
and a race track, this could take several days.  On the computer we will be done in a few seconds, with clean fingernails and money left in our wallet!    
Click on Rear Axle Ratio under General Vehicle Specs and type 
5.9 over the current value of 6.2. (If 5.9 had not been within acceptable limits, the program will display the limits.)  Then click on OK to return to the Main Menu.  There you can click on Running Conditions, then the Calculate Performance button at this menu (as you did before) or just click on the Calculate Lap Times button at the  top of the Main Menu.  The Calculate Lap Times button  is a shortcut.  Figure 4.8 shows the results:  a Lap Time of 16.08 seconds with an average MPH of 84.0, with an "improvement" of .08 seconds 
Figure 4.7 Vehicle Menu for Changing Rear Axle Ratio 

Click on Rear Axle Ratio and change it to 5.9. Then recalculate perfor­mance. 
You could then repeat this sequence trying several different axle ratios. 
Improvement of .08 seconds by going to 5.9 ratio from 6.2 ratio. 
Click here to show Test History Log options . 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.9 Test Results with Test History Log 
An alternate way to see this comparison and improvement is to display the Test History Log.  Click on History as shown in Figure 4.8 and select Show History Now.  You will get the screen of Figure 4.9 with a history and comparison of the last 25 runs. (Although only 7 runs show, you can click and slide the slide bar to see all 25.) The History Log is a convenient way to keep track of your results to watch trends.  We could use it here to find the best axle ratio. 
Graph these results with the Baseline 6.2 axle results for the graph in Figure 4.10.  Figure 4.10 points out a couple of things: 
• 
Engine RPM is lower throughout the run with the 5.9 axle ratio.  This keeps the engine in a higher HP RPM range for better acceleration and better performance.  Figure 4.11 graphs acceleration Gs for these 2 conditions, showing the 5.9 axle ratio shows higher acceleration for nearly the entire time the vehicle is accelerating (power On). 

• 
By clicking on a graph line with the mouse, you can bring up the cursor (vertical line).  The value of the Engine RPM lines at the cursor (near maximum RPM) is 7315 for the new 5.9 axle ratio and 7545 for the 6.2 axle ratio. 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.11 Acceleration Gs for the Two Axle Ratios 

Click on Data_ to_Graph and select Accel Gs for this graph. 
5.9 Ratio shows higher acceleration for nearly the entire time the vehicle is
Click on Back to return to 
accelerating.
the Test Results screen, then click on History and Show History Now. A 
High negative
useful feature of the 
acceleration 
History Log is the ability 
due to braking
to change the Test Title 
is about same 
in the first column to 
for both tests. 
anything you want.  Click on the Test Title for the 5.9 axle ratio run, then answer No to the question “Retrieve the specs which produced these results?”.  You will be shown a test input box like that of Figure 4.12. (You will find the ability to Retrieve specs which produces certain results in the History Log to also be a very useful feature.  Another useful feature is to click on History, then Clear History Log.  This lets you erase all the History rows, which is useful when you are starting on a new project.) 
Figure 4.12 Changing Test Name in History Log
We could continue to try different axle ratios through “cut and try” to find the ratio giving the quickest lap times.  However the program has a built in feature to do this automatically.  Click on Back at the top of the Test Results screen. Then at the Main Screen, click on Find Best Gear Ratio. The program will automatically try a wide range of axle ratios to see which gives the quickest lap times. 
For these LATEMODL.355 specs, the program finds the 
5.4axle ratio is the quickest, and it asks you if it should load in that ratio.  Answer Yes, and you find that the new lap time is 16.04 seconds, .04 better than 5.9 and .12 seconds better than 6.2. However at a different track, a different axle ratio would be best. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Circle Track Analyzer allows you to easily maneuver between screens and menus with the click on a mouse. 

• 
The program has several useful features like the Performance Summary and History Log to track you changes, and the Notes and Graphs to understand and analyze your performance. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

• 
The Circle Track Analyzer allows you to simulate "real world" modifications by simply typing in new specifications which simulate the hardware modification. 

• 
Like most other vehicle settings, there is no single "best" axle ratio for the LATEMODL.355.  The "best" ratio will change depending on other specs like Track Length and Banking. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Example 4.2 Calibrating Circle Track Analyzer for Your Car 
When using the Circle Track Analyzer to predict the effect of modifications on a certain vehicle, it is best to first "calibrate" the program to match the vehicle's actual results.  "Calibrate" means to fine tune an instrument (the Circle Track Analyzer in this case) to improve its accuracy.  Once the program is calibrated, its predictions are more likely to match your vehicle's response to modifications. 
We will calibrate the program for a Late Model with a 406 motor.  The car runs 16 second laps at the local low banked quarter mile track.  Ideally you could just go to the Vehicle Library and find an exact match for this car.  However there probably is not an exact match for any car already in the library, so we will have to build one by adjusting the specs for a car from the Vehicle Library. 
You can start with a completely blank screen for all vehicle specs by clicking on File, then New at the Main Screen. You can also blank out just the Engine, Front Suspension or Rear Suspension by clicking on File, then New at their respective screens.  However, for most beginners it is recommended you always start with a example vehicle.  This way, for specs you don’t know, there is already a spec entered which may be close to matching your vehicle. 
The LATEMODL.355 in the Vehicle Library would be a logical choice.  (It actually doesn’t matter which vehicle you start with.  Once you have entered in the specs for your car, you will get the same lap times even if you start with a Quarter Midget or Busch car.  The advantage of starting with a car close to your car is that its specs are more likely to be accurate for specs you don’t know. Click on LATEMODL in the Vehicle Library, then click on Open to open it. 
Now you will start to actually enter specs for your car. 
Figure 4.14 Engine Examples 
Click on File, then Open Example Engine to load 
in example actual dyno curves. Click here to load an Engine Analyzer power curve. 

Click on Calculate to estimate a power curve from only a couple of simple inputs, like cubic inches and a general description. 
Click on engines to obtain a preview, where you can tell by the comments if this engine may be similar to your engine. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Engine specs 
Click on Engine specs at the Main Menu to display the current power specs for the Late Model’s 355 Chevy.  You could enter the cubic inches, pick a clutch setup and type in a dyno curve for your engine.  However, you don’t know your engine’s power curve. Fortunately, there are several options for building a power curve, which include: 
• 
Use the current curve which came with the Late Model file.  The engine comments show that this is for a 355 Chevy, so this may not be the best choice. 

• 
If you had a complete dyno curve, you could enter the dyno curve in the right hand section of this screen.  This is usually the most accurate method, however be sure the dyno curve covers a wide RPM range.  You may have to estimate and enter torque and HP at higher and lower RPMs than was actually run on the dyno.  For example, if your dyno run is from 4500 to 7000, estimate and enter data at 3000, 3500, 4000 RPM and 7500 and 8000.  This is especially important if you run the engine on the track above or below the RPMs of the dyno curve.  The program assumes power drops off rapidly above and below the RPMs for which you have actually entered torque and HP. 

• 
Pick an example power curve supplied be Performance Trends.  This is done by clicking on File at the top of the Engine screen, then selecting Open Example Engine.  This is a good choice if there is an example which matches your engine fairly closely. 

• 
You could build a power curve in one of Performance Trends’ Windows Engine Analyzer programs, then send it to the Circle Track Analyzer. 

• 
You could Calculate a power curve based on some very simple inputs and engine descriptions.  This is usually the last resort, but can still give reasonable power curves. 


We’ll choose to pick an example, so click on File, then Open Example Engine as shown in Figure 4.14.  In the list of example engines, click on ones that look promising.  The program will give a Preview on the right side or RPM range, peak HP, and comments which describe the engine.  If you want, you can click on the top engine, then use the down arrow key [.] to go through the entire list and see the preview of each engine. 
The G-406-2BBL engine looks fairly close to your engine (the G standing for “good”).  You estimated your engine made about 375 HP and the example G-406-2BBL shows about 10 HP over that at 387.  This is a fairly close match.  Either click on Open or double click on G-406-2BBL to use these specs of an actual dyno curve for a 406 2BBL.  Your engine specs will now look like Figure 4.15.  Click on Back at the upper left corner or somewhere outside this menu to close it and return to the Main Screen. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

General Vehicle Specs 
Enter the vehicle weight with driver and fuel level you want to simulate.   
Enter the weight %s if you know them.  If you don’t know them, but do know the corner weights, click on one of the Clc (calculate) buttons next to them.  They will open up a Calculation menu shown in Figure 4.17.  Note that this menu will open up with the corner weights for the current car already entered.  You will have to type your weights over these weights.  When all 4 of your corner weights have been entered, the menu will display the Weight %s for your car.  Click on the Use Calc Value(s) button to load in these Weight %s. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples (C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


You don’t know your car’s Height of CG, so leave in the current height.  Wheelbase you measure at 102 inches with a tape measure, the same as the example LATEMODL.355.  Rear Axle Ratio you know is a quick change with a 4.88 ring and pinion and 47 tooth top gear and 34 tooth lower gear.  Click on the Clc button by Rear Axle Ratio to obtain the menu of Figure 4.19.  Type in your information to obtain a calculated 6.03 axle ratio, then click on Use Calc Value to load 6.03 back into the Vehicle Specs menu.  For Rear Axle Type you click on the combo boxes’ down arrow key to see your choices.  Of the choices choose Quick Change (more losses) best matches your car. (You may not have realized it before, but there is a “downside” to a quick change rear axle. Quick change rear axles have more HP losses in them due to the additional gears.) 
Aerodynamics 
For the Aerodynamic specs, click on the Type combo boxes’ down arrow key to see your choices.  There are many choices and you 

choose Typ Late Model. Notice how the aerodynamic specs are now “grayed out” and you can’t change them.  That’s because your choice of Type is telling the program all it needs to know.  To enable these specs so you can change them, you would have to choose the top choice in the Type list of Use Specs Below. 
Figure 4.20 Aerodynamic Type Choices 
Click here to drop down list of choices 

Click on these arrow buttons to see entire list of choices 
Transmission 
For the Transmission specs, click on the Type combo boxes’ down arrow key to see your choices.  Std Duty Manual seems reasonable so you choose it.  For Ratio of Gear Used, enter 1 since you run your trans in top gear with a 1:1 ratio. 
Rear Tires 
For the Rear Tires specs, click on the Type combo boxes’ down arrow key to see your choices. Typical Racing Tire (average traction) seems the closest match for your 10” tires. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Left and Right rear tires’ circumferences of 87 and 89 and the program shows you the Stagger of 2”.  Enter in the Tread Width of 10”.  Click on the Clc button by Traction Factor to be shown the Calculation Menu of Figure 4.21.  Click on the combo boxes’ down arrow key for your choices and choose Average Suspension Setup. 
Click on the Back button to return to the Main Screen. 
Front Suspension 
Click on Front Suspension to open the Front Suspension Specs menu shown in Figure 4.23.  You may first be given an important notice, shown in Figure 4.22.  The Circle Track Analyzer can not analyze all details of handling and vehicle performance. 
Figure 4.23 Front Suspension Specs 

Click on
Like Engine Specs, 
File, then
this screen does have 
Open
examples to open.  
Example
Click on File, then 
Front
Open Example Front 
Suspensio
Suspension as shown 
n for
in Figure 4.23.  In the 
possibly
list of example 
finding a suspension
suspensions, click on 
ones that look 
layout
promising.  The 
close to
program will give a 
your car’s 
Preview on the right 
layout
side of spring rates, camber, and comments which describe the suspension. If you want, you can click on the top suspension, then use the down arrow key [.] to go through the entire list and see the preview of each suspension. 
None of the Example suspensions appear to be closer to your suspension than the current LATEMODL.FAB already part of the LATEMODL.355 vehicle.  Therefore, you should measure your front suspension as discussed in Example 4.3.  You notice the spring rates and camber is different than your car, so you type them in (600 and 550 for right and left springs, and -4 and 2 for right and left static camber).   Note that if the suspension’s layout is significantly different than your car’s, the effective wheel rate could be much different for your car, even if you type in the correct spring rate.  However, for the other specs, you will leave these specs as the example vehicle had them.  When you have more time, you will measure up your front end. 
Click on the Back menu item in the upper left corner or click on the [ X ] button in the upper right corner to return to the Main Screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Rear Suspension 
Click on Rear Suspension to open the Rear Suspension Specs menu shown in Figure 4.24.  You may first be given a similar important notice as in the Front Suspension menu shown in Figure 4.22.  Again, the Circle Track Analyzer can not analyze all details of handling and vehicle performance. 
You go through these measurements and make changes to more closely match your car.  You type in your spring rates of 200 and 225 for the left and right. Note that if the suspension’s layout is significantly different than your car’s, the effective wheel rate could be much different for your car, even if you type in the correct spring rate.  Rear suspension measurements are usually not a critical as front suspension measurements.  When you are finished, click on the Back menu item in the upper left corner or click on the [ X ] button in the upper right corner to return to the Main Screen. 

Running Conditions 
Click on Running Conditions to Weather conditions, driver preferences and most importantly, track specs.  Since you are not that interested in how weather conditions affect performance, you select  Typ Nice 70 deg day in Midwest.  You will now notice that the other weather specs are “grayed out” or disabled.  You think ”Good, now I don’t have to worry about them.” 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

For the Reports/Graphs spec of Show Results Every ... you leave it as is (because you are not sure what it means).  Basically, if you want more detailed results, suspension analysis and graphs you will select a smaller time increment.  This will be something you will 

For Track Specs you will select a Type from the list which most closely represents your track:  Typ 1/4 Mile Low Banks.  As with Weather Specs, the other track specs are now disabled. 
For Driver, you leave the existing LATEMODL.355’s driver 
description of Typical Aggressive Driver. The Running Conditions screen should now look like Figure 4.27. 
Calculate Lap Time Performance 
Whew, we’re finally done!  Now for the fun stuff, lets see how this car performs.  Click on the Calculate Lap Times button in the Running Conditions menu, or click on the Back button to return to the Main Screen, then click on the Calculate Lap Times button at the top of the Main Screen.   
The program calculates a lap time of 14.04 seconds with a average MPH of 64.1 MPH.  The results also show the Mx and Mn 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


(maximum and minimum) RPM during the run as 6537 and 3580.  Your car actually drops to a lower RPM in the corners, down to 3400 RPM and revs to 6300 before braking. 
Match My Lap Times Feature 
The program is currently predicting your car runs faster than your actual car’s 

14.3 second laps.  We should fine tune these specs to get a better match between real lap times and what the program predicts.  In previous versions of Circle Track Analyzer, this would mean doing a lot of “cut and try”.  Adjust a spec, see if you got a better match on, say Mn RPM.  If you did, now did you “screw up” your Lap Time, etc. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

The solution is the Match My Lap Times option, available at the Main Menu.  Return to the Main Menu from the Test Results screen of Figure 4.23.  Click on the Match My Lap Times button at the top, to display the menu similar to Figure 4.24.  Enter in your actual performance, including a description of your engine.  You choose ‘500 2BBL, ported heads’ as the engine description.  It should look like Figure 4.29.  Then click on the OK (adjust veh. specs to match performance) button. 
The program makes several passes adjusting critical specs between each pass, fine tuning the specs to find a combination which best matches your actual vehicle’s performance.  After 30-40 passes, it arrives at the combination shown in Figure 4.30.  At the top of this menu you see how close these new specs will make the performance match.  In the lower section, you see the Old specs, and the new ones arrived at, which you can either Keep, or discard and return to the old specs. You see that the program adjusted tire Traction Factor down to about 77% from 85%, and HP down slightly to 376 from 387.  However, the program estimates that a 406 engine with a 500 2BBL and ported heads should make 421 ft lbs, more than the example power curve which had 394 ft lbs. 

Click on the Keep These New Specs button to keep these new specs.   
Note: The combination of specs arrived at by the Match My Lap Times feature are just one of possibly many combinations which produce your car’s performance.  They are NOT necessarily the most accurate combination of specs to match your car. 
The menu of Figures 4.29 and 4.30 are now gone.  At the Main Menu, calculated performance and you confirm these specs do give results as stated by the Match My Lap Times screens, and that do match your car, just as shown in Figure 4.30.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Saving Your Car 
Return to the Main Menu and click in the Vehicle Comments section and change them to match these specs for your Late Model running 14.3 seconds.  There are comments which can be entered for the total vehicle at the Main Screen, and for the individual components of Engine, Front Suspension and Rear Suspension.  An easy way to show all these comments is to click on the Show All Comments button at the Main Screen.  Figure 4.31 shows what you could type in for comments. When finished, click on the Save Vehicle button, or on File and then Save Vehicle.  You are first as shown Figure 
4.32. You answer No, since these specs no longer represent the LATEMODL.355, but that you want to give it a new name.  Next the screen shown in Figure 4.33 is displayed.  Change the New Vehicle Name from LATEMODL.355 to something that matches these specs, like MY-LATMO.DEL. 
As Figure 4.31 shows, there are individual File names for the Engine, Front Suspension and Rear Suspension.  You should also go into each of these menus and save these components under a new file name, one the matches the components on your car.  If you do, then you will want to update the Vehicle file with these new component names also.  At the Main Screen, click on File, then Save to update MY­LATMO.DEL with these new component file names. 
Now you are ready to check various modifications on your vehicle, like changing gear ratios, tire size, or power curves, etc. 

Conclusions: 
• 
After accurately entering specs, and then fine tuning them with the Match My Lap Times feature, the Circle Track Analyzer's results can closely match the results of most any specific vehicle. 

• 
The program has several options for entering specs, like picking example specs from preloaded examples, preloaded lists, or by calculating them using Calculation menus from other known information or measurements 

• 
You can make most any file from the Vehicle Library match your vehicle's specs following this procedure.  Then you can save all these specs under a new name in the library for use at any time in the future. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.33 Screen for Entering New Vehicle Name for Saving 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Example 4.3 Analyzing the Front Suspension 
The Circle Track Analyzer has several ways for you to analyze your front suspension.  The Front Suspension input screen has several analysis features itself. Then once lap time performance has been calculated, the Analyze Suspension option shows you what the suspension will be doing as the car goes around a particular track. 
Start this example by opening the BUSCH car from the Vehicle Library.  Then go to the Front Suspension screen as shown in Figure 
4.34. You may notice a message appears which says the this version of the program cannot accurately predict how suspension changes will affect lap times.  However, it can still estimate how suspension changes will affect weight transfer, roll, spring deflection, front camber change and front roll center location. 
Figure 4.34 Front Suspension Screen for 96-BUSCH.V-8 

Click on File, then several options are available for Opening saved suspension file, printing blank worksheets, etc for entering specs or evaluating other suspension setups. 
From this menu, you can:                                            
• 
Enter or edit any of the measurements and specifications displayed, and watch calculated specs and the layout drawing be updated automatically. 

• 
Open or Save a file of complete front suspension measurements by clicking on the File menu item, then either Open, Save or Save As. 

• 
Add, edit or review comments to describe the front suspension measurements currently displayed.   

• 
Produce various amounts of suspension Dive and Roll and watch Camber, Roll Center and Spring Compression change.  (You must be in the ‘Show Big’ mode to see Spring Compression.) 

• 
Change the Options to somewhat customize this screen for you. 

• 
Get Help to explain these options by clicking on Help or pressing <F1>.  Help definitions are also available anytime you click on an input spec’s name or input box or a calculated spec name or value.  See Figure 4.36. 

• 
Return to the Main Screen by clicking on Back (or File, then Exit). 


At the top of this screen, the blue title bar shows the current Front Suspension is [ 96-BUSCH.LOW ], which is the front suspension for the Busch Series Thunderbird on a low banked track.   
If you wanted to analyze a different front suspension, you could click on File in the upper left corner, then select Open Example Front Suspension.   See Figure 4.34.  You will obtain a screen like Figure 4.35 of the Front Suspension Library, which lists files of 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

suspension measurements which have been provided by Performance Trends for your convenience.  You could also click on File, then New to blank out all measurements here to start with a clean “sheet of paper”. 

Files are arranged alphabetically. Click on a file to highlight it and display a Preview. Then click on the OK button (or double click on file name to Open in one operation). 
The Advanced button opens up a standard Windows screen to let you open files from most any folder or disk drive (not available in Beginner level). 
For now, lets just analyze the current Busch Tbird front suspension.  If some measurement is not familiar to you, click on its name or the spec and a brief description appears in the Help frame, along with a page #  from this manual for more help. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Changing Specs: Enter X&Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Joints Option 
First, lets try changing a measurement.  For example, lets raise the ball joint on the right upper control arm 1/2 inch.  This would mean the Right(Height) measurement for Upper Ball Joint (the distance from the ground) would increase .5 inches.  So change 20.4 to 20.9.  When you get ready to press <enter> after typing in 20.9, watch the drawing, especially the right side suspension at point A and Camber Gain.  (Remember, this is a front view, so the right side of the car is actually on the left side of the screen.)   
Important: Always remember you are looking at a Front view of the car. This means the Right side of the screen actually shows the Left side of the car and the Left side of the screen shows the Right side of the car. 

Table 4.1  Before  After  
Upper Rt BJ Ht  20.4  20.9  
Roll Center Ht  3.7  4.0  
Roll Center Rt  4.7  7.2  
Camber Gain  -.81  -.99  
Stc Camber  -2.5  -2.05  
Upper Arm Len  7.16  7.38  
Upper Arm Ang  24.78  28.30  

Press <enter> and notice how Camber gain changed from -.81 to -.99. See Table 4.1. This minor change will produce slightly more negative Camber Gain, which means the right tire will see slightly more negative camber for the same amount of Dive in the corner or during braking.  You will notice that Stc (static) Camber (in the Other Specs at the right side of the screen) changed from -2.5 to -2.05 degrees. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

You will also notice that the Length and Angle of the Upper Arm (printed in light gray in the lower left corner changed from 7.16 inches to 7.38 and 24.78 degrees to 23.30.  You might be thinking that the only way for the length of the arm to change is by installing a different arm, which is correct.  What we simulated was raising the Upper Ball Joint and adjusting the length and angle of the upper arm so the Frame Pivot would stay in the same spot. 
If you want to change the height of the Rt Upper Ball Joint, but use the same arm (arm length stays the same), you can start adjusting the Rt Upper Ball Joint X dimension until you get back the original length of 7.16 inches.  For example, after a few tries, you’d find that an Upper Ball Joint X of 21.25 inches would produce a length of 
7.16 inches. 
If you click on Options at the top of the Main Screen you will see that the first option (Enter X&Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Joints) is checked. This means you enter the X and Height readings of both ends of the arms, and the length is calculated from those readings.  If you select its alternate option (Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle), then you could change the Height at the Upper Ball Joint and the mount at the frame would change as necessary to hold the 

length of the arm and its angle constant.  You could then change the Angle of the arm to produce most any X or Height at the Frame Mount. 
Changing Specs: Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle Option 
Lets try this.  Click somewhere outside the menu choices of Figure 1.5  to close these choices without changing them.  Then click on the 20.9 and type in 20.4 and press <enter> to return it to its original value.  Camber Gain should go back to -.81 and Stc (static) Camber should go back to -2.5. 
Now click on Options and then on the Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle option. You will be given the notice shown in Figure 
1.6 and see that the Upper and Lower Arm Dim. (“Dim.” is an abbreviation for “dimensions”) are now enabled so you can enter them directly. The Upper Frame Mount and Lower Ball Joint inputs are disabled (printed in light gray), meaning these values will be calculated from the other inputs. You may notice that the  Height of the Lower Ball Joint change slightly, from 8.75 to 8.74 which is due to slightly rounding differences in the math. This hundredth inch difference will not produce any significant error in the results.  See Figure 4.40. (next page) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Now change the Upper Ball Joint Height from 20.4 to 20.9 and press <enter>.  Notice how the Length of the arm stays at 7.16 inches and the Angle stays at 24.78 degrees. Frame Pivot X and Height have changed as they would in order to keep the length and angle constant. Stc Camber changes just as it did before to -2.04 because the Ball Joint has moved the same as before.  However the Camber Gain now is -.77 because the arm angle stayed at 24.78 where the arm angle changed to 28.30 after raising the Ball Joint Height to 20.5. 
The choice of which of these options you use (Enter X&Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Joints or Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle) can have a significant effect on how your inputs affect other specs.  Use the one which makes the most sense for the type of modification you are trying to simulate. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Show Dive & Roll 
This screen lets you simulate the car going through various amounts of dive and roll.  To see this feature,  click on the Yes option for Show Dive and Roll. You will see the Dive and Roll text and arrow boxes become enabled so you can enter a certain amount of vehicle Dive in inches and Roll in degrees.  The arrow boxes let you increment Dive and Roll up and down by clicking on the appropriate arrow.  You will also see the suspension drawing move just as it would in the real vehicle.  The suspension in the static position is drawn in light gray for comparison (or dark gray if you have chosen that Option).  The static Instant Centers and Roll Center are also drawn in light gray so you can see how much they have moved due to Dive and Roll. 
To the right of the drawing, you will see Dyn Camber also change as you go through various amounts of Dive and Roll. 
Figure 4.41 Analyzing the Suspension Motion with Dive and Roll 
Dynamic suspension is shown in Black, Blue and Red. Dynamic Camber shows how tire camber changes with Dive & Roll. 


Click here to show more detail, like Figure 4.42 

Click on arrow buttons to increment Dive & Roll up or down, or just type in your desired Dive & Roll 
Dyn Camber, deg:  Dynamic Camber is the camber the tire will see due to Dive and/or Roll.  Camber has a large impact on the tire patch on the track, and therefore tire traction.  By optimizing camber you can produce higher traction in the turns and therefore faster lap times. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Tips for understanding Roll Center, Camber and Camber Gain discussed above are listed at the end of Appendix 2. 
Another option at this screen is the “Draw Big” button next to the Dive and Roll inputs.  Click on this button to draw the suspension layout larger as shown in Figure 4.42.  Again the Dive and Roll inputs are available, but now you may see some details better. The Draw Big screen has a calculation which is not available on the normal screen, called Spring Compression: 
Spring Compressn: Positive spring compression means the spring is compressed from its static (standing still before any Dive or Roll) position, or the car is diving. Negative spring compression means the spring is elongated or the car is rising.  By making spring compression match the motion shown by your shock travel indicators, you ensure you are moving the suspension through somewhat the same motion which your car sees on the track. 
Analyze Suspension 
You can also analyze the suspension actually going around a particular track.  Change the Upper Ball Joint Height back to the original 20.4 inches.  Then click on Back to return to the Main Screen.  Then calculate lap times.  At the top of the Test Results screen, click on Analyzer Suspension as shown in Figure 4.43. This will produce the screen shown in Figure 4.44. 

Before entering the Suspension Analysis Screen, you may get a notice like Figure 4.45.  The Analysis Screen lets you compare the suspension of the current test results with some previous test results you have saved as a baseline.  However, this comparison is only possible if the previous test was run on the same type of track (same Track Length and Infield Width, but Banking can be different). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

One important feature of Figure 4.44 is watching the Front Suspension go through “computer predicted” Dive and Roll and watching Camber and Roll Center Location of the Front Suspension change. This avoids you having to “guess” at reasonable combinations of Dive and Roll to enter in the Front Suspension screen. 
Fig. 4.44 Suspension Analysis Screen (See Section 3.6, page 116 for details) Unlike the Front Suspension Screen where you enter your “guess” at Dive and Roll, Dive and Roll are calculated from track specs and vehicle specs. 
Track Position and Spring compression and tire loadother info shown here on all 4 corners shown here 

The Suspension Analysis screen displays lots of information and has several options.  Read Section 3.6 (starting on page 
116) to understand all the possibilities. For now, click on the 
[X]box in the upper right corner, or the [-] box in the upper left corner to close this screen.  The program will ask you if you want to save these results as a Baseline.  Answer Yes because we will compare this setup to the one where we raised the Right Upper Ball Joint .5 inches.  See Figure 4.46.  The program will take some times while it saves these results, then it asks you for a name for these results.  Enter something meaningful, as shown in Figure 4.47. 

Click on Back at the Test Results screen to return to the Main Screen.  Click on Front Suspension and change the Right Upper Ball Joint Height from 20.4 to 20.9 as we investigated before.  Then calculate Lap Times and click on Suspension Analysis.  You may not 
automatically get the Baseline results shown with the new results.  If not, click on Options and then Show Baseline. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Conclusions: 
The Circle Track Analyzer has several features to analyze suspension effects, especially the front suspension which is usually the most critical. 
• 
The Front Suspension input screen has several features itself to analyze camber and roll center changes. 

• 
After Lap Times have been calculated, the Analyze Suspension screen shoes what the suspension is likely to do actually traveling around a track of a particular design. 



Right spring compression has increased due to drop in wheel rate 
Baseline results from previous run (20.4” Upper Ball Joint Ht) for comparison. On computer screen, these Baseline results are shown in bright pink for easy identification. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
Background: 
The Circle Track Analyzer was developed as a: 
• 
Tool to help predict effects of certain engine and vehicle modifications for engine builders, racers, and performance enthusiasts. 

• 
"Theoretical Race Track" to allow anyone to try things which are too expensive, difficult, dangerous, or impossible with a real vehicle. 

• 
Learning aid for those who want to better understand vehicle dynamics during full power acceleration. 


The Circle Track Analyzer will provide you an engineering estimate of what should occur when general modifications are made based on the principles of vehicle dynamics and physics.  By seeing all the specifications which go into the calculated results, you may have a false sense that the computer knows your vehicle exactly; what manufacturer's tires you are using, who built the chassis, what your 4 link settings are, etc.  Actually the computer does not know if the specifications are for a production Yugo or a Earnhardt’s #3 car. 
A good analogy to the Circle Track Analyzer is a cylinder head flow bench.  A flow bench can not predict exact torque and HP curves, but is still a vital tool for engine development.  In the same way, use the Circle Track Analyzer results as a guide or second opinion of how your vehicle should perform under near optimum conditions. 
Iterations 
Before we talk about accuracy, it is important for you to understand the types of calculations going on inside the Circle Track Analyzer and other sophisticated simulation programs.  A simple program could involve calculating top speed from HP and frontal area: 
1/3 Top Speed = K1 x Frontal Area x HP 
You enter an engine HP and a Frontal Area and obtain a Top Speed value.  The answer you obtain on the left side of the equation has no effect on the inputs on the right side of the equation. 
However, lets look at a simplified version of the equation which the Circle Track Analyzer uses just to calculate the maximum potential tractive force (traction) the tires can produce to accelerate the car forward. 
Max Tractive Force = Tire Friction x ( Wt on Rear Tires + Wt Transfer ) 
Where: Wt Transfer depends on the vehicle's acceleration rate which depends on the tires Max Tractive Force. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

In this case the "Max Tractive Force" answer you get on the left side has an effect on the inputs to the equation on the right.  The only way to solve equations like this is through "iterations".  Iteration is a process where you assume an answer, use that answer in the right side of the equation, calculate the actual answer and see if the actual answer is "close enough" to the answer you assumed.  
Iteration Process: (For this example we will not use actual numbers since the calculations are quite complex) Assume Max Tractive Force is 3000 lbs Calculate that the vehicle acceleration could be .8 Gs and the Wt Transfer value is 600 lbs Using the Wt Transfer of 600 lbs, we now calculate that the Max Tractive Force is 3200 lbs Are assumed Max Tractive Force and calculated Max Tractive Force "close enough" (within 20 pounds) No, so do again using new Max Tractive Force answer Calculate that the vehicle acceleration could be .85 Gs and the Wt Transfer value is 640 lbs Using the Wt Transfer of 640 lbs, we now calculate that the Max Tractive Force is 3218 lbs Are assumed Max Tractive Force and calculated Max Tractive Force "close enough" (within 20 pounds)   Yes, so an approximate answer is: Max Tractive Force = 3218 lbs 
If "close enough" was 200 lbs, our first answer of 3200 lbs would have been good enough.  If "close enough" was 1 lb, it may require many more calculations to arrive at an answer which is "close enough".  If the equation is very complex and the inputs are an unusual combination, no answer may be reached no matter how many times the calculation is performed.  This is called "not converging on a solution".   
Making the tolerance ("close enough") small will produce more exact answers but will require more calculation time.  Performance Trends has selected tolerance bands for iterations which give good accuracy with reasonable calculation times, and allow the process to "converge on a solution". 
Because many of the equations within the Circle Track Analyzer must be solved by iterations, there is no one exact answer.  All calculations are an approximation.  Therefore, do not be alarmed if a Lap Time improvement of .02 seconds is shown for changing in Dew Point from 67 to 66, but changing from 66 to 65 showed a .00 second improvement.  These results are basically saying lowering the Dew Point results in a very small gain in Lap Time. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Major Assumptions 
To make the Circle Track Analyzer and the specifications which describe the vehicle containable on a personal computer, several simplifying assumptions are made which are listed below.  Other approximations and assumptions exist as identified in Section 1.3 A Word of Caution and scattered throughout this manual.  Also see Assumptions in the Index. 
• 
All vehicle components are assumed to be perfectly stiff, which means that suspension members do not bend, tires do not deflect (squat or shift), suspension bushings do not deform or move. 

• 
All tires behave about the same as far as how cornering ability changes with load on the tires. Actual tires vary greatly between designs. 

• 
Tires can continually handle all the heat buildup caused by pushing them to their limits. 

• 
Maximum cornering traction occurs when all 4 tires are evenly loaded. 

• 
There is no delay in engine torque getting to the tires due to driveshaft, axle or tire "wrap up". 

• 
There are no shock absorber effects. 

• 
There are no bumps or roughness in the track. 

• 
If spring compression as shown in the Suspension Analysis screen in Section 3.6 exceeds 1.5 inches, additional spring stiffness is added to somewhat simulate the springs coils touching, and to avoid the suspension encountering some impossible situations. 

• 
Tire camber and camber changes are not used to estimate tire traction and cornering ability at different parts of the track. 

• 
Steering inputs and therefore tire slip angle are not used to estimate tire traction and cornering ability at different parts of the track. 

• 
The brakes are assumed to be large enough and capable of dissipating all heat to be able to continually brake at levels capable of the tire’s maximum traction. 

• 
In this version, Roll Center Offset from car centerline (left or right) is not used to predict lap times, traction, corner weights, or suspension motion.  Most text books and authorities do not address the effect of Roll Center Offset, but all discuss how Roll Center Height affects vehicle roll. 

• 
There is no change in the Height of CG due to "pitch rotation" or the body lifting or squatting. 


Accuracy 
From reading the assumptions above and scattered throughout this manual, it is obvious several important aspects of vehicle performance are "glossed over".  Therefore, it is impossible to make exact predictions of what will happen to your vehicle when modifications are made. 
There are many combinations of vehicle specs which can produce the same lap times (and even the same maximum and minimum engine RPMs).  Therefore, do not assume that if you have gotten the lap times to match your car that now you have your car simulated correctly.  Also, especially do not assume that you now have the program simulating your suspension motion correctly. 
This program should be used as a guide to help you visualize what can 
happen on your car when you make general (not detailed) modifications.  In no way does it exactly simulate your car on a particular track, or can it predict exact changes in handling. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




Appendix 2: "General Tips" 
The following "tips" will show you how to change the Circle Track Analyzer calculations by adjusting various inputs. 
Calibrating "Tips" 
Calibration is the process of adjusting the program's inputs to produce results which closely match a certain vehicle's drag strip results.  Example 4.2 shows this process in some detail, including the Match My Lap Times feature.  Here are some tips on how to adjust vehicle specs to get the computer’s predicted lap times to match your lap times if the Match My Lap Times feature cannot come up with a good solution. 
Obviously, many inputs affect lap times.  Here are the ones which are difficult to measure or know for certain, and have a large effect on lap times. 
To Decrease Lap Times (faster laps) 
• 
More Engine Power (especially long tracks) 

• 
Higher Banking 

• 
Wider Infield Width 

• 
Higher Traction Tire ‘Type’ 

• 
Higher Tire Traction Factor 

• 
Higher Driver Aggressiveness (Braking and/or Accelerating) 

• 
Lower Lift Coefficient (larger negative numbers, especially big tracks) 

• 
Lower Drag Coefficient (especially long tracks) 

• 
Lower Frontal Area (especially long tracks) 


Using Dynamometer Data for Engine Power Curve Specs 
Engine Power Curve specs are discussed in Section 2.2.  Dynamometer tests which measure engine performance can be done in different ways.  How the test is done can over-estimate or under-estimate the engine's torque and HP in the vehicle. 
The Circle Track Analyzer works best if you enter steady state dynamometer results, with the engine equipped exactly as it will be in the vehicle. "Equipped" means with the full exhaust and intake system, all accessories running like water pump, fan, etc.  "Steady state" means that engine RPM is stable (not changing) when the torque and HP are measured.  This is sometimes called a “step text”.   
Accelerating dynamometer tests, where the engine speed is constantly increasing (i.e. 300 RPM/sec), can under-estimate an engine's steady state performance.  You may think an accelerating test best represents an engine accelerating in a vehicle.  However, the Circle Track Analyzer calculates the power loss due to accelerating the engine, which changes with gear ratios, track specs, etc.  See "Inertia" discussion below. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Rotating Inertia 
The difference between stationary and rotating mass is important for a racer to understand.  Ever racer knows that the less a car weighs, the faster it can accelerate. However, not every racer knows that removing 30 lbs from the vehicle's rotating components (wheels, tires, engine flywheel) will show a larger improvement in accelerating performance than removing 30 lbs from the frame or body.    
This is because not only do you have to accelerate the tires down the quarter mile, you have to get the tires to spin faster also.  The spare tire in the trunk is easier to accelerate than the same tire mounted on the axle.  The tire on the axle has both mass and rotational inertia. 
Rotational inertia is a part's resistance to changing its rotational speed.  Jack up the axle and try to spin the wheel.  Neglecting friction, a heavier wheel requires more force to spin than a light wheel.  In addition, if the mass is concentrated in the tire and less in the wheel, it will require even more force to spin.  That is because rotational inertia depends on mass and the distance the mass is from the center of rotation.  See Figure A1. 
For this reason, rotating components with small diameters, which concentrate the mass close to the center of rotation, have much less inertia.  These components consist of the driveshaft, axle shafts, etc.  Reducing the weight of these components insignificantly reduces you rotating inertia Rotating components with larger diameters (flywheel or torque converter, wheels/tires, somewhat in the crankshaft, damper and transmission components) contain most of the vehicle's rotating inertia.  These are the components to concentrate on when trying to reduce rotating inertia.  For example, removing 1 pound from the engine’s flywheel will have 100 up to 1000 times or more effect on the vehicle’s rotational inertia than removing 1 pound from an axle shaft. 
  Figure A1  Changing Rotation Inertia 

Base Inertia 
Reduce weight 50% Same Diameter Inertia is reduced 50% Requires only half the HP to accelerate 
Reduce Diameter 50% Same Weight Inertia is reduced 75% 
Requires only a quarter the HP to accelerate 
Example 
Try some examples with the Circle Track Analyzer with the 96-BUSCH.V-8.  The Baseline  96-BUSCH.V-8 performance is a 19.36 seconds lap time.  
Now, remove 32 lbs from the Rear Wheels by setting Rear Wheels/Tires Wt = 10 instead of 42 in the Vehicle Specs menu.  (The program assumes the front wheels/tires weight the same as the rear.)  This modification simulates moving 32 lbs from the all 4 wheels and placing it somewhere on the body, since we did not also reduce Vehicle Weight 128 lbs (4 x 32). Calculate performance an we get a new Lap Time of 19.32 seconds.  Nearly a four hundredths (.04) improvement just by moving weight around on the vehicle (not moving it to change traction). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Engine Inertia 
Engine inertia is more complicated than other rotating inertia on the vehicle.  However, for cars which do not shift or do not start from a stand still (circle track racing in 1 gear only), it is almost always best to reduce engine inertia to improve acceleration. 
The Circle Track Analyzer estimates the rotational inertia of the engine and clutch/flywheel or converter and transmission parts based on: 
• 
Displacement in the Engine Specs menu (the higher the displacement, the higher the inertia). 

• 
Clutch Description in the Engine Specs menu. 


Tips on Simulating Modifications 
The previous "inertia" examples point out an error most users will make.  When you make a modification, always think of how it could affect each specification. The example of removing 32 lbs from the wheels and tires not only affected Wheels/Tires Wt, but also Vehicle Weight and possibly the Weight %s, Rear, Left or Cross.  Below is a list of common modifications and the specs they may affect. 
Engine Modifications 
Engine modifications can change all Engine Power Curve specs and Displacement. If the engine is naturally aspirated (not supercharged, turbocharged or uses nitrous oxide) and you increase the HP, generally the RPM where the HP will peak will increase also.  Vehicle Weight and % Wt on Rear Tires may also change if you change to aluminum components (less weight) or add a supercharger (more weight), etc. 
Adding, Removing or Shifting Weight 
• 
Vehicle Weight 

• 
Weight %s, Rear, Left and Cross 

• 
Front & Rear Wheels/Tires Weight 


Changing vehicle height 
• 
Height of CG 

• 
Suspension Specs, like heights o f Frame Mounts, Ball Joints, etc 

• 
Frontal Area, sq ft 


Changing wheels and tires 
• 
All the Wheels/Tires Specs 

• 
Vehicle Weight, lbs 

• 
Weight %s, Rear, Left and Cross 

• 
Suspension Specs, like heights o f Frame Mounts, Ball Joints, etc 

• 
Frontal Area, sq ft 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Roll Center: 
Several authorities agree that the static Roll Center (before any Dive or Roll) should be from 2.5" to 4.5" above the ground.  For road 
race cars (turning both left and right) you want to keep the Roll Center near the car's centerline (left or right). The farther the Roll Center is to the Left, the quicker the car will react (more it will Roll) when going into a Left turn.  For this reason, many asphalt circle track (left turning) cars locate the Roll Center to the right of center (less Roll) and dirt cars locate the Roll Center to the Left of center (more Roll and hopefully better "bite" at the right front).  However, the car is more predictable "all around" if the Roll Center is kept close to the car's centerline. 
Higher banking (20 degrees or more) usually requires a lower Roll Center, in the 2-3 inch range. The more mass in the front of the car (heavier engine or engine more forward), the higher the Roll Center should be. Some authorities believe a lower Roll Center works better on dirt because the higher body roll produces more "side bite" from the 
tires. Lower Roll Centers require stiffer springs to control Roll.  However, stiff springs hurt traction on bumpy tracks.  The less the Roll Center moves during Dive and Roll, the more predictable the car's handling.   Most authorities agree that holding the Roll Center position as constant as practical during Dive and Roll is optimum. 
Camber/Camber Gain: 
For Circle Track cars (turning left), reasonable Static Camber values (before any Dive or Roll) are:  Left Side +1 to +2 degrees, Right Side -2 to -4 degrees, the tighter the turn, the higher the camber. 
Wider and/or stiffer sidewall tires require less Static Camber. 
Camber Gain should be in the range of -1.75 for a flat track, -1.25 for a medium banked track (10-15 degrees) and down to -1 for highly banked tracks (over 25 degrees) on the outside tire (right tire in a left turn). For circle track cars (always turning left), the desired camber gain on the left side may be less or even a positive number, depending on track banking and other factors. These Camber Gains are based on the program's standard definition as the amount of Camber Change from 1" of Dive. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Appendix 3: New Features in Version 3.2 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.2: 
• 
Program is now a 32 bit version, fully compatible with newer operating systems, starting with Windows, 95, then 98, Me, XP, and 2000. This also allows you to use much longer, more descriptive file names for saving vehicles, suspensions and engines. It is also more compatible with newer printers. 

• 
The program is now designed for 600 x 800 or higher resolution screens. 

• 
There is now an option in the Analyze Suspension screen to output an ASCII file of the wheel loads for analysis in other programs. 

• 
The graph screen is now larger, and generally fills the entire screen. 

• 
Version 3.2 adds a major feature where you can estimate the change in corner weights and ride height by jacking (turning adjusting screws) on the springs on the 4 corners. 

• 
The program now figures the wheel rates more like our more detailed Suspension Analyzer. 

• 
This change in general stiffens up (increases) the wheel rates. It also makes the dive and roll predicted in the Analyze Suspension screen more accurate. Some users reported that the vehicle’s were “bottoming out” in the Analyze Suspension screen on high backed tracks with lower spring rates. 

• 
Braking is now done more gradually, like a human driver, on high speed tracks. 

• 
The Front Suspension screen now has Edit options to copy measurements from one side to 

• 
another, and move all measurements in, out, left right, up, down, or re-center all measurements based on changes to the tire track. 

• 
The Front and Rear Suspension screens now accept fractions as inputs and convert the fractions to decimal equivalents. For example, enter 8 5/8 and press <Enter> and the program will convert it to 8.625. There must be a space between the whole number part and the fraction and you must use a slash “/” in the fraction. 

• 
There is now a separate “Examples” folder for example vehicle files provided by Performance Trends. New vehicles which you save will be saved to a separate folder. 

• 
File commands to save a vehicle file to a floppy disk, or open a vehicle file from a floppy disk. 

• 
The Rear Suspension screen now reports wheel rates for both bump (as before) and roll. 

• 
A preference has been added to allow you to tell the program to assume the rear axle is a Solid Axle. This setting is then used to better estimate the effect of the engine’s torque on wheel loads (lifting the right rear tire) in the Analyze Suspension screen. 

• 
You can now choose to list vehicle, engine, front suspension and rear suspension files alphabetically (as normally done) or by saved date, with the most recently saved files listed first. This should make it easier to find recent files more quickly. 

• 
New Example Vehicles have been added, like Legends cars. 

• 
The user’s manual is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Display User’s Manual. The manual is in a high quality PDF format  

• 
The Performance Trends website is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Performance Trends on the Web.  


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 









Appendix 4: New Features in Version 3.5 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features added since v3.2 was released.  Some we added to later versions of v3.2 and some are new in Version 3.5: 
• 
A major new feature is the concept of balancing the Front Lateral Load Distribution (FLLD) with the rear lateral load distribution.  This concept can be used to find a “balanced” setup by adjusting spring and roll bar rates, and roll center heights.  This is discussed in detail below. 

• 
The ‘Rule of Thumb’ Suggestions for a good starting point for a setup now includes a suggestion for the rear roll center height.  This is based on obtaining a recommended FLLD.  See details below. 

• 
The program can now do an angled, symmetric 4 link rear suspension, as used in the late model Mustangs and GM Metric chassis. 

• 
Added the ability to do Camber Change and Roll Center Migration tables and graphs in the Front Suspension Screen. 

• 
The Front Suspension Screen now calculates and displays 2 additional suspension characteristics:  1) Tire track change (tire scrub) as the front suspension goes through dive and roll. 2) Swing Arm lengths, the length from the tire center to its instant center. 

• 
Changed the name of the Corner Jacking button at top right of main screen to Corner Weights.  That’s because 2 new options have been added, letting you do Tire Diameter/Circumference changes and weight/ballast movement to check the affect on corner weights 

• 
Screen colors are now more compatible with Windows XP. 

• 
Added ability to save a vehicle file to or open a vehicle file from a floppy disk or CD, with a default drive letter from A to Z, selectable in Preferences. 

• 
New Example files have been added, like GM Metric 4 Link Rear Suspension.. 

• 
Added 'Edit' options to the 'Calculate' menu item in the Engine Specs screen.  The new Edit options let you factor the power curves up or down, or re-sort the table if there are blank rows or RPM increments out of order. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

FLLD (Front Lateral Load Distribution) 
When a car makes a turn, weight is transferred from the inside tires to the outside tires.  However, how this weight transfer is split between the front and rear has a huge impact on the feel and handling of the car.  If more weight transfer occurs on the front of the car, the outside front tire is being “overworked” more than the rear outside tire, causing less cornering traction at the front.  This is more likely to produce understeer or a push.  Very simplistically, if the Front Lateral Load Distribution is 50%, that means the weight transfer split between front and rear is the same, and that should produce neutral handling.  The book “Race Car Vehicle Dynamics” by Milliken and Milliken (with assistance by Terry Satchell) discusses this concept in detail.  This concept is similar to the idea of balancing the front and rear roll angles presented in recent magazine articles. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure A8 is displayed if you click on the “Find” button shown in Figure A7.  This “Find FLLD” screen lets you find a certain Front Lateral Load Distribution (FLLD), which can be a good indication of how the car will handle at the apex or transistion of the turn (no power, no braking).   
Pick the 'Adjust' factor to tell the program what vehicle component(s) you want to adjust.  Enter your desired 'For This FLLD', then click on the 'Find Now' button.  For perfect theoretical 'Balance', the FLLD should be 50%.  However, from experience, Milliken suggests a target 'starting point' FLLD value of 5 percentage points higher than the percent weight on the front tires (100% - Rear Wt % = Front Wt %).  By default, the program will load in this value, but you can change it to anything else you want.  Higher FLLDs tend to make the car tighter, with more understeer.  Lower FLLDs tend to make the car looser, with more oversteer. 
There are several ways to obtain a certain Front Lateral Load Distrbution percentage.   

The new settings you find using this feature MAY NOT BE THE BEST AND COULD BE UNSAFE.  USE YOUR JUDGEMENT when making adjustments based on this concept. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

To reduce the possibility of using very strange settings, the program will calculate the average front and rear natural frequencies for the springs.  If these frequencies are significantly different than those typically used, the program will warn you.  Typically, the front natural frequency will be in the range of 1.4 to 2.0 and the rear will be .1 to .5 points lower than the front. 
For many vehicle combinations, the program can not find settings to match your requirements.  Many times this is due to the Front or especially the Rear roll centers being too high.  High roll centers transfer more weight laterally through the suspension linkages and less through the springs, making the springs and roll bar have less effect on this tuning factor.  You may then want to have the program adjust the Rear Roll Center to find the FLLD you desire.  After you adjust the Rear Roll Center and keep this change (click on OK/Keep), then you can go back into this screen and try adjusting springs and/or roll bar and they are likely to have more affect. 
Fig A9 Other Features using the FLLD Concept 

If you find settings which you want to keep, click on OK/Keep and they will be loaded back to the vehicle specs screen.  For the Front and Rear Roll Center Heights for some suspension types, you must make a mental note of this setting and go back into the Front or Rear Suspension Screen and try various setting to arrive at this height.  The program can not make this change automatically for you. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Corner Weights 

The screen in Figure A10 is used to determine how static corner weights change as you make adjustments to the car.  These adjustments include turning 'jacking screws' to adjust the preload on springs, changing tire diameter/circumference, and moving weight around like ballast.  Click on one of the 3 tabs at the top to choose your option.  The first tab, Jacking, is the same as it was in v3.2. 
For most all inputs on this screen, click on the name or input box and its definition is given in the section at the bottom of the tab page. 
For the Tire Change tab, choose which tire to change and which dimension you want to work with.  The program will then display the Current Tire dimension from the Vehicle specs screen.  You are allowed to change this should it not be set exactly as you want. Then enter the New Tire dimension and see the effect on Cross Weight.  Rear and Left percents are not affected by changing tire diameter. 
For the Move Weight tab, choose the type of weight change, and the amount of weight to change.  Then type in the Current Location of the weight and/or the New Location of the weight after the move.  Cross, Rear and Left percents can all be affected by moving weight. 
Click on Back (keep changes) at upper left of this screen to return to the main screen while keeping your changes to corner weights, tire sizes, vehicle weight, etc. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Front Suspension Screen 

Figure A11 shows some of the new features for the Front Suspension Screen.  Figure A12 shows an example of the new “Table & Graph” feature for calculating Roll Center “migration” for various amounts of dive and roll. 
Lt and Rt Scrub shows in Figure A11 is the amount the tire moves out from the center of the car as it goes through the amount of dive and roll you have specified. 
Lt and Rt Swing Arm Length is the distance from the center of the wheel/tire to its instant center.  Long lengths indicate that camber will change little with dive and/or roll (Camber Gain will be low).  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Table & Graph 
If you click on Table & Graph at the Front Suspension Screen, you will obtain a screen similar to to the top picture in Figure A12.  This screen shows you 2 tables of Roll Center Height and Roll Center Left (distance left of center) for a set on Dive and Roll combinations.  Distances right of center are labeled as “negative”.  (Negative in not “bad”, it is just a way to indicate right, the opposite of Left.)  You could have also chosen to do a Camber Table.  Then the top table would be for the Right side and the bottom would be for the Left side. 
You can also select to have a Baseline condition displayed in the Table (Show Baseline Data).  This is useful to compare 2 different 
suspension layouts. A Baseline is some previous condition which was shown in the Table.   
To save the current Table as a Baseline, click on 'Baseline', then 'Save This Data as Baseline'.  The program will ask you for a Comment to describe the Baseline condition. This Comment will be printed with the Table when you print it if you are Showing the Baseline condition.  This comment can also be edited by clicking on 'Baseline' and then 'Baseline Comment'. 
After saving a baseline Table, you could close the Table by clicking on Back in the Menu Bar, make a change in the suspension and create the table again by clicking on Table & Graph. You would produce a Table like in the upper left of Figure A12. 
Click on the Options menu item and select 'Specs for Table Rows & Columns' to change the Dive and Roll increments, and which is used for rows and which is used for columns.  You will obtain the menu shown in the upper right of Figure A12. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Note: If you change the Table specs, any previously saved baseline conditions will be lost because that baseline has different increments for columns and rows, which would not match up to the new increments you have selected. 
Click on the Graph menu item and you can Graph the selected data from the Table.  To select data, you highlight various rows by clicking and dragging the mouse in the top Table for the Right Side.  These selected (highlighted) rows, AND the corresponding rows in the bottom table for the Left side, will be graphed.  If you have selected more data than the Graph can hold, you will be told and the top and bottom rows only of what you’ve selected will be graphed. 
This screen graphs of Camber in degrees on the vertical Y axis versus either Roll or Dive on the horizontal X axis.  The data graph here is based on what was highlighted in the Camber table when you clicked on the Graph menu item.  Data is always graphed for the Left side as well as the Right side for whatever conditions you have selected (highlighted).  
If you make graphs of Roll Center Height and Roll Center Left, as done if Figure A12, this graph will show the actual location of the roll center and how it moves.  Height is on the vertical Y axis and Left is on the horizontal X axis.   
Read the labels in the "legend" at the right side of the graph to see which lines are which colors. The graph is always "autoscaled" which means the program picks the scales for drawing it to display all data with good detail. Print the graph on your printer using 

your Windows default printer by clicking on the "Print" menu command. You can change settings, labels and Windows printer setup by clicking on the "Options" menu command.  See Figure A13.  You can return to the Camber Table screen by clicking on the Back menu command. 
The Graph Options screen  is divided into 4 sections.   
The first section is called "Graph Labels":  Click on "Use Standard Labels" for standard labels to be printed on the graph.  Click on "Use Labels Given Here" and the program will use the labels which you can enter or change.  Click on any of the 3 text boxes and type in your chosen titles or labels.  
The second section of the Graph Options is called "Print": Click on "Black and White" or "Color" to tell the program how to print the graph.  Unless you have a color printer, you should choose "Black and White". The program always graphs in color on the computer screen.  Click on the "Print Now" button to print the current plot on the printer, the same as selecting the "Print" menu command.  Click on the "Windows Printer Setup" button to see the current printer selection or select a different printer for printing the graph. 
The third section lets you pick the line thickness for the "Plot Lines", either thick or thin.  
The fourth section lets you pick the color for the "Background Color" of the graph, either black or white. 
Click on OK to return to the Graph Screen with your changes in effect. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Rear Suspension Screen 

The new Suspension Type of Symmetric Angled 4 Link lets you find the roll center and roll stiffness of rear suspensions found in several vehicles, including GM Metric and later model Mustangs.  Because it is only for symmetric layouts, you will only enter measurements for 1 side, and they will be used for both sides. 
Engine Screen 
Edit options have been added to the Calculate menu item to allow factoring the power curve up or down by a certain percent.  The option is also available to “clean up” the power curve should you enter RPM increments out of order, or leave blank rows in the data. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




Appendix 5: New Features in Version 3.6 
In Version 3.6 we’ve broken the Circle Track Analyzer into 3 different programs: 
• 
Roll Center Calculator (RCC), which does the Front Suspension only. 

• 
Roll Center Calculator Plus (RCC+), which does the Front Suspension and Rear Suspension, plus some front to rear “balance” analysis. 

• 
The full Circle Track Analyzer (CTA), which does everything the old Circle Track Analyzer v3.5 did plus all these new features. 


Here is a listing of the major new features added in Version 3.6 of full Circle Track Analyzer.  Note that unless these new features specifically mention Roll Center Calculator, they do NOT apply to the Roll Center Calculator versions. 
• 
The program now lets you enter a rear anti-roll bar.  This input changes the front to rear roll stiffness, which affects most all of the handling ratings the program will calculate.  RCC+, CTA. 

• 
The program now lets you enter both a front and rear aerodynamic Lift Coefficient.  Many times when you make an aerodynamic adjustment, you only affect 1 end of the car, like a rear spoiler adjustment.  This adjustment not only affects overall “road holding” ability of the car, and therefore lap times, it also affects handling, the tendency to oversteer or understeer.  CTA only. 

• 
The program has a new Calculation Menu utility called “Adjust” for the front and rear Lift Coefficient and Drag Coefficient.  You can choose a type of vehicle modification, enter the starting and modified condition, and the program shows you how the current lift and drag coefficients would change.  This way you have an estimate of how certain vehicle modifications would affect the entire aerodynamics of the vehicle.  CTA only. 

• 
You can now enter more details about the front suspension, both for Double A Arms and McPhearson Strut suspensions.  This added detail lets you locate both the front and rear A Arm mounts on the frame, and the angle of the McPhearson Strut when viewed from the side.  These details let the program more precisely locate where the A Arm attaches to the frame in the 2 dimensional layout.  They also determine how much Anti-Dive is built into the front suspension.  Anti-Dive is the vehicle’s resistance to diving the front end due to braking.  Reasonable starting points for Anti-Dive for most all circle track asphalt cars in the 2000-3500 lb range are 10% on the Right Front and 5% on the Left Front.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
We’ve taken the concept of balancing the Front Lateral Load Distribution (FLLD) with the rear lateral load distribution a step farther.  We’ve developed a Performance Trends exclusive called Oversteer/Understeer rating.  It is based on how evenly the tires on the 4 corners of the car are loaded.  If they are equally loaded left to right, and loaded front to back the same as the front to back weight distribution, we say that is a 0 Oversteer rating, or Neutral handling.  Several factors go into this rating, including banking forces, aerodynamic forces, dynamic weight transfer left to right, and front to back.  CTA only. 

• 
You can display the actual wheel loads for the car in “transition” on the track, at the point where you are neither braking or accelerating. It is at this point where the program determines the Oversteer/Understeer rating described above.  For this “transition” condition, you can also save a “baseline” condition for comparison to some modification you have made to the vehicle.  This way you can actually see the effect you modifications will have on wheel loads and the handling rating. CTA only. 

• 
The oversteer/understeer rating is displayed as the car goes around the track on the Analyze Suspension screen.  By saving a condition as a Baseline, you can compare your current conditions to a saved Baseline.  This is the same as what is described in the preceeding paragraph except it is done at all locations on the track.  This is also the same as the “Analyze Suspension” feature in previous versions, except now it includes the front and rear aerodynamic downforce, and the handling rating.  CTA only. 

• 
The ‘Rule of Thumb’ Suggestions for a good starting point for a setup now includes suggestions for a “Big Bar Soft Spring”  (BBSS) setup.  The BBSS theory is you use significantly softer front springs to better handle bumps in  the track, and to lower the car in the corners for less aerodynamic drag and less weight transfer inside to outside.  Then to counteract the additional roll these soft springs would allow, the anti-roll bar is stiffened significantly.  Other adjustments include a much stiffer than typical right rear spring, paying more attention to Anti-Dive and shock valving.  CTA only. 

• 
Improved the Tire Scrub calculation for a Double A Arm front suspension (how much sideways tire movement there is during dive and roll).  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
Refined the calculations for suggested spring rates for “Starting Point Suggestions” report.  CTA only. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

• 
Program is now more compatible with Windows Vista and Windows 7.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
Program is now better at remembering a printer or printer orientation changes.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
Program is now better at find newer versions of Adobe Acrobat and Reader, and other PDF compatible programs for viewing the User’s Manual.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



The Depth measurement is the distance behind the “axle link”, an imaginary line connecting the centers of the left and right wheels or spindles. It is shown as the gray, dotted line running left and right in the picture.  If the distance is behind the axle line, it is deep into the car and is a positive number.  If it is ahead of the axle line (toward the front bumper) it is a negative number. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure A18 Oversteer/Understeer Rating 


Click here to update the “Dynamic Handling” rating and to display the screen below 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 





Appendix 6 New Features in v4.0 
The Version 4.0 adds several features, including a totally new Plus version.  Now the program includes these 4 levels: 
• 
Roll Center Calculator v4.0  (front suspension only) 

• 
Roll Center Calculator ‘Plus’ v4.0  (front and rear suspension) 

• 
Circle Track Analyzer v4.0  (front and rear suspension, engine, vehicle, track and lap time simulation) 

• 
Circle Track Analyzer ‘Plus’ v4.0  (all CTA features plus advanced inputs and outputs) 


New Calculations 
Roll Center for Double A Arm and McPhearson Strut suspensions are now calculate using the Force Based Roll Center methodology. This method is more accurate and realistic.  You will no longer see roll centers being calculated, say, 50 or 1000 inches beyond the track of the car, which never made much sense.  Force Based Roll Centers are more accurate than the old "Kinematic Roll Center" method of earlier versions.  There are options for you to display either or both, and go back to the old "Kinematic Roll Center" method in you want.  This is set under 'Options' in the Front Suspension (Roll Center Calculator) screen.  Fig A20. 
The program's Lap Time and "On Track" Handling Calculations now include mass effects of the vehicle.  This will, produce more realistic handling, spring, and shock motion, body roll, dive, squat, etc as it goes around the track.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
You can now enter details about Bump Springs and Ride Height in the Front Suspension screen, and watch their effect as you go through dive, roll, and squat.  Fig A21,  Fig A29.  
The program lets you specify if the shock is mounted in the middle of the spring, as with coil over springs.  Or you can specify if the shock is farther inboard or outboard of the spring and by how much.  This can greatly affect shock absorber performance and bump spring performance if it is mounted on the shock absorber.  Fig A21. 
IMPORTANT: If the Bump Springs are mounted on the shocks, the program will calculate the force the bump springs adds to the springs. For example, if the shocks are, say, 5” outside the springs, the bump springs will have more effect out there because the motion ratio is higher.  Let’s say the actual bump spring force is 400 lbs at the shock.  But at the spring itself, this could be the same as a bump spring on the spring adding 900 lbs.  The program will report this as 900 lbs because that is the effect on the suspension and handling. 
You can now include some simple shock absorber inputs which will affect the wheel loads and the handling ratings for the program's Lap Time and  "On Track" Handling Calculations.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A21 
IMPORTANT:  The vehicle dynamics simulation is assuming a perfectly smooth track and only smooth applications of throttle, brake and steering. In real racing this is hardly the case.  Real world, more abrupt changes in these inputs to the vehicle will have a large effect on shock velocities and therefore shock forces. 
The Circle Track Analyzer Plus version allows you to input more details about shocks and travel limits of the springs.  You can also import shock data from proper versions of the Performance Trends Shock Dyno software.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Version only. Fig A21 – A24 B 
Program now has refined the method of calculating the spring Motion Ratios for Double A Arm and McPhearson Strut suspensions to better match the Suspension Analyzer. 
The program will now calculate how much the Ball Joint/Spindle Angle changes as you go through suspension movement.  This will help you identify if the Ball Joints can go into bind, being pushed past the limit in Ball Joint Angle change.  Fig A28 
Program now calculates several suspension handling outputs each time you calculate a lap time.  These new outputs like Dive, Roll, Squat, etc can be reported or graphed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Original Report Data, version 3.6 or earlier 
Time  Feet  
MPH  Accel Gs  
% Throttle  Eng RPM  
Turn #  Curvature  
Downforce  Corner Gs  

New Report Data, Circle Track Analyzer v 4.0 
OSUS Factor  Left Camber  
Right Camber  R.C. Left  
R.C. Height  Roll  
Dive  Squat  
Left Scrub  Right Scrub  
L Upper BJ Angle Change  L Lower BJ Angle Change  
R Upper BJ Angle Change  R Lower BJ Angle Change  

New Report Data, Circle Track Analyzer v 4.0 Plus 
LF Tire Force  RF Tire Force  
LR Tire Force  RR Tire Force  
Total Tire Force  LF Bump at Tire  
RF Bump at Tire  LR Bump at Tire  
RR Bump at Tire  LF Spring Force  
RF Spring Force  LR Spring Force  
RR Spring Force  LF Shock Force  
RF Shock Force  LR Shock Force  
RR Shock Force  LF Shock Vel  
RF Shock Vel  LR Shock Vel  
RR Shock Vel  LF Ride Ht  
RF Ride Ht  F Aero Downforce  
R Aero Downforce  Change CG Ht  
L Bump Force  R Bump Force  

Program now has a more detailed Roll Bar Rate calculator with more inputs and better accuracy.  Fig A21, A26. 
The results now let you input or watch "Rear Squat" in the calculations, how much the rear suspension goes down measured from directly above the rear axle to the ground. 
The Oversteer/Understeer factor has been refined to be more realistic.  In earlier versions it depended too much on the front to rear weight distribution. 
Ride Height is now and input and you can watch Ride Height change as the car goes through Dive, Roll and Squat. Squat (the amount the ride height at the rear axle goes down) is a new input and output.  Fig A29   
New Features 
You can now write the results on the Reports screen to an ASCII data file for doing your own custom analysis in other programs, like Microsoft Excel.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Version only.  Fig A30. 
You can now shim the upper A Arms up or down in the Front Suspension (Roll Center Calculator) screen.  Fig A31. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

The program now will let you report more than double of the points as before when you go around the track, for more detailed analysis, reports and graphs.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
The engine screen and engine graph are now enlarged to show more detail.  Also, the Engine Screen has a note explaining the Max RPM and how critical it is to get that correct.  It also has a feature to help you enter data to realistically represent the power curve at its max RPM, past the HP peak.  The new version has several new crate motors added as examples.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A32. 
The program now works much better when closing the Analyze Suspension screen.  It also gives you 2 options of “Back” (simply closing the screen) or “Back (and save as baseline)”.  Previous versions would ask you each time you closed this screen if you wanted to save the current results as the Baseline.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A33. 
Many screens and input fields are now larger to accommodate longer file names.  Fig A34. 
The program now lets you pick which columns of output data to display and print under the "View" option on the Report Screen.  These combinations of which columns to view can be stored as “templates” for easy recall in the future.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Version only.  Fig A35. 
"Modifieds” are now added to the list of general body types for Aero inputs in the Vehicle Specs screen.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
Program is much more streamlined for calculating the Handling Ratings from the Main Screen, and backing out of the "Analyze Handling Performance”  screen. Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
There is a new Option in the Front Suspension screen of allowing very small inputs for RC size cars. 
The program now works much better when calculating the handling rating.  Earlier versions could require you to do the calculation 2 times to work properly. 
Program now better remembers the handling rating when you enter other screens and do not make any modifications in that screen. Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
Program now does not let you enter screens from the main screen until all calculations are done refreshing the handling rating on the main screen.  This can avoid problems if you click through screens too fast.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
Fixed a bug where canceling from printing to a PDF printer could cause program to stop.   
Doubled the max size allowed for Comments to 800 characters. 
Printing 
Program has an added option for "Print Suspension Outputs" so you can print either the standard outputs, or the new handling outputs.    Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
You can now load a picture file (.jpg file) on the Main Screen and in the Front Suspension (Roll Center Calculator) screen and have it appear on printouts.  Fig A36, A38, A42. 
You can now specify a "Company Logo" (.jpg) file and 2 lines of “Title Text” to be included in your printouts.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus only.  Fig A37, A38.. 
Program now lets you pick which columns of output data to display and print under the "View" option on the Report Screen.  If you select to print all data, only the columns displayed will be printed, up to 15 columns max.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. Fig A35. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Program has an added a Preference for printer width adjustment. The program can now better print the title of columns of output, which could be up to 3 lines long of text. Help screens are now shown in Notepad so you can print them if you want. 
Graphing 
You can now graph up to 4 different data types on a graph.  Each of these can be assigned a factor, like “x 100”.  This way small numbers like “Bump at Tire” will show up if you also include very large numbers like “RPM” or “Spring Force”.  You can also save graph “templates” of various combinations of data and scaling factors under different names for use in the future.  Fig A39. 
You have a graph option of “(down shown negative)”.  If you choose one of these option, then a number like Dive will be graphed in the opposite direction. For example, if the Dive number increases, the graph line will go up on the graph.  However, the motion in the car is for the car to go down as Dive increases. If you choose the “(down shown negative)” option, increasing Dive will be a graph line that goes down and can be easier to understand.  Fig A39. 
The program now lets you graph results from up to 6 different tests.  Fig A40.  
Because these larger labels can take up more space, and with up to 24 graph lines which can be graphed (4 data types and up to 6 different tests), there may not be enough space to display all labels.  Then the program will then produce "More" buttons which can appear either above or below these labels if they can not all be displayed on the screen, so you can scroll through all the labels.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A40. 
There is now an option to Draw Segment Lines on the Graph Screen under Format.  If you choose this, vertical lines are drawn at the start of each turn and each straightaway. These lines are drawn based on the current (latest) data.  So if the latest run was a 13 second lap time and the other runs you graph are about 16 seconds, these lines are based on the 13 second lap times.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A41. 
Background color choice is now checked in the dropdown menu in the Graph screen.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
The Graph Line Thickness has been adjusted to be slightly thinner for the "thick" settings.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
In the Graph Screen under Format, there is a new option for printing the graph labels larger than before.  Fig A41.   
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 





Figure A 22 Copying Shock Data from Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno Software  
If you have an appropriate Shock Dyno Plus version, you can click on the ‘Send’ option and be presented with the 4 corners of the car. For each corner you can select which shock or coil over’s data to send, or choose “None” for that particular corner. You may have to open other Shock Dyno files, do the Send and select different corners of the car for sending shock data for different shocks. 

As shown in the picture above, the Export Data will copy this data to the computer’s clipboard.  This is the same process as doing a Windows Ctrl-C or a Copy process. Therefore, do not do a copy or paste command before you go to your Circle Track Analyzer program to import this data. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 





Figure A 24 B Manually Entering Shock Data 
A typical Shock Dyno graph is shown below, a graph of shock force vs absolute velocity. The graph shows both the compression and rebound force (positive and negative force).  But the velocity is only shown as a positive number, which is not actually correct. One reason for this is the industry does not have a common definition of positive and negative velocity. In Performance Trends programs, we have defined that a positive velocity is when the shock is expanding, or getting longer. 

So, if you have a shock dyno graph like above, just take the positive forces and assign them as occurring at a negative velocity. If done correctly, the graph will angle from the upper left down to the lower right as shown below. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




















(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Index 
4 Link, 37, 141, 149 
Accel Gs, 51, 73, 160 
Accel. Aggressiveness, 48 
Acceleration, 51, 91, 102, 127, 128, 133, 142 
Active Bar Length, 65 
Adobe, 152 
Advanced file Open, 1 
Aerodynamics, 19, 109 
Air Temperature, 46, 47 
Analysis Report, 49, 69, 71, 72 
Analyze Perf, 5, 7, 49, 71 
Analyze Suspension, 5, 7, 69, 89, 117, 123, 125, 135, 151, 161 
Angle, 19, 20, 25, 27, 29, 30, 34, 35, 40, 92, 120, 121, 159, 160 
Anti-Dive, 151 
Anti-roll bar, rear, 151 
Arm Len & Angle, 25, 34, 120, 121 
Arm Length, 26, 65, 146 
ASCII Data, 135, 160 
Aspect Ratio, 61 
Assumptions, 6, 3, 6, 13, 21, 29, 30, 36, 41, 50, 51, 55, 88, 90, 98, 106, 127, 129, 132 
Axle Ratio, 5, 97, 101, 103, 104, 109 
Back Color, 80 
Background Car Layout Color, 34 
Background Color, 148 
Balance, 151 
Ball Joint/Spindle Angle, 159 
Bank Angle, 20, 48, 67 
Barometer, 46, 47 
Baseline, 7, 89, 90, 91, 97, 102, 123, 124, 125, 132, 147, 148, 151, 161 
Beginner, 11, 33, 44 
Big Bar Soft Spring, 151 
Brake Aggressiveness, 48 
Bump Springs, 159 
C.G., 57, 58 
Calc Lap Times, 45 
Calculation Menu, 5, 1, 8, 13, 53, 54, 65, 66, 108, 109, 110, 151 
Calibrate, 105 
Camber, 25, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 117, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 134, 141, 146, 147, 148, 160 
Camber Changes with New Inputs, 25, 34 
Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs, 25, 34 
Camber Gain, 32, 34, 35, 119, 120, 121, 123, 134, 146 
Car Length, 88, 90 
CCs, 12, 56, 57 
Cd, 19, 20 
Centerline, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 92, 93, 129, 134 
CG, 18, 93, 94, 160 
Chain, 19, 59 
Chain Drive, 59 
Circle Track Analyzer, 1, 4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 13, 14, 15, 21, 22, 33, 43, 44, 49, 55, 67, 69, 72, 81, 82, 84, 85, 87, 89, 91, 97, 103, 104, 105, 106, 109, 110, 111, 113, 115, 117, 125, 127, 128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 151, 159, 160, 161, 162 
Circle Track Analyzer Plus, 159, 160, 161, 162 
Circumference, 22, 53, 60, 141 
Clc button, 53 
Clc Button, 8, 12, 18, 19, 21, 22, 29, 30, 39, 42, 46, 47, 53, 56, 57, 59, 62, 64, 65, 66, 109, 110 
Clutch, 13, 133 
Coil Over, 159 
Coil Springs, 62 
Comments, 5, 7, 13, 33, 36, 43, 44, 54, 85, 91, 106, 110, 115, 117, 161 
Company Logo, 161 
Continuous, 91 
Corner Gs, 52, 160 
Corner Weight, 108, 141, 145 
Corner Weights, 7, 18, 53, 57, 90, 107, 108, 129, 135, 141, 145 
Corr. Barometer, 46 
Crate Motors, 161 
Current Run, 50 
Cursor, 74, 76 
Curvature, 51, 160 
Data To Graph, 74 
data types, 74, 162 
Dew Point, 8, 13, 46, 47, 65, 66, 128 
Differential, 59 
Disabled, 35, 46, 47, 54, 111, 112, 120 
Displacement, 12, 13, 55, 56, 57, 133 
Displacement in CCs, 57 
Displacement in Liters, 57 
Distance, 18, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 30, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 48, 51, 56, 58, 60, 61, 64, 65, 73, 88, 90, 92, 93, 119, 132, 146, 147 
Dive, 29, 30, 31, 34, 90, 117, 119, 122, 123, 124, 134, 147, 148, 151, 159, 160, 162 
Double A Arm, 24, 26, 28, 29, 30, 35, 151, 159 
down shown negative, 162 
Downforce, 20, 90, 91, 99, 151 
Drag Coefficient, 19, 20, 131, 151 
Draw ‘Big’, 31 
Draw Segment Lines, 162 
Driver, 48, 67, 112, 131 
Dry Bulb, 8, 46, 47, 53, 65, 66 
Dynamic Camber, 30, 122 
Dynamometer, 13, 131 
Elevation, 46, 47 
Engine, 4, 5, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 21, 23, 37, 38, 40, 43, 45, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 67, 68, 72, 73, 78, 81, 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

82, 83, 84, 85, 88, 91, 92, 93, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 105, 106, 110, 114, 115, 127, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 141, 149, 159, 161 
Engine Analyzer, 13, 14, 15, 78, 106 Engine Cubic Inches, 54, 55 Engine Graph, 11 Engine RPM, 51, 73, 88, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 129, 131 Engine specs, 11, 12, 14, 55, 85, 106 Enter X & Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle, 25, 27, 34 Enter X & Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Jnts, 25, 34 Examples, 5, 13, 14, 33, 34, 43, 54, 67, 68, 95, 97, 105, 106, 
110, 117, 131, 132, 135, 141 Extension Lines, 34 
Feet, 51, 73, 90, 160 File, 5, 1, 2, 5, 13, 24, 33, 36, 38, 43, 44, 81, 82, 83, 84, 88, 
97, 105, 106, 110, 115, 117, 118, 135 Final Drive Ratio, 53, 59 Find Best Gear Ratio, 103 FLLD (Front Lateral Load Distribution), 141, 142, 143, 144, 
151 Flywheel, 12, 13, 132, 133 Force Based Roll Center, 159 Format, 74, 77, 79, 80, 162 Friction Circle, 48, 90, 91 Front Pivot to Axle, 40 Frontal Area, 20, 21, 60, 127, 131, 133 
Gear, 1, 17, 19, 21, 23, 38, 59, 60, 101, 109, 115, 131, 133 Graph, 1, 6, 7, 11, 13, 49, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 87, 88, 
99, 100, 101, 102, 135, 146, 147, 148, 161, 162 Graph data types, 74, 162 Graph Labels, 148 Graph, Draw Segment Lines, 162 Graphs, 5, 47, 50, 73, 75, 103, 112 Grid Style, 80 Gs, 51, 52, 73, 102, 103, 128 
Height of C.G., 18, 109, 129, 133 Help, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 13, 33, 43, 53, 109, 117, 118, 135, 162 Highest RPM Before Braking, 68 History, 5, 49, 74, 87, 88, 89, 102, 103 Hollow, 62, 64, 65 Humidity, 13, 46, 47, 53, 65, 66 
Improvement, 50 Improvement Summary, 50 Include Vehicle Comments, 85 Include Vehicle Specs, 85 Inertia, 12, 13, 18, 131, 132, 133 Infield Width, 48, 67, 88, 123, 131 Install, 8 Installation, 5, 4 Instant Centers, 25, 34, 92, 122 
J bar, 28, 40, 43 Jacobs Ladder, 43 
Kinematic Roll Center, 159 King Pin Angle, 28, 30 Know Dew Point?, 66 Know Relative Humidity?, 65 
Lap Time, 5, 6, 22, 50, 67, 68, 88, 97, 99, 101, 112, 113, 114, 124, 125, 128, 131, 132, 159 Lap times, 1, 18, 22, 62, 67, 68, 88, 89, 103, 105, 113, 117, 
122, 123, 129, 131, 151, 162 Last Run, 50 Layout, 23, 34, 39, 43 Leaf Springs, 38, 41, 62, 63 Legend, 74, 77, 88, 148 Length, 25, 27, 31, 34, 35, 120, 121 Letter Tire Size, 61 Lever Arm Length, 64 Library, 5, 81, 82, 83, 84, 105, 115 Lift Coefficient, 20, 21, 99, 131, 151 Line Style, 80 Liters, 57 Load from Engine Analyzer, 13, 14 Lower Arm Angle, 27 Lower Arm Length, 27 Lower Ball Joint, 27, 120 Lower Frame Pivot, 24, 27 Lower Spring Pad, 27, 28, 29 Lower Strut Loc, 28 Lowest Engine RPM in Turns, 68 
Main Menu, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 22, 45, 49, 62, 67, 82, 83, 97, 
101, 106, 114, 115 Match My Lap Times, 5, 62, 67, 68, 113, 114, 115, 131 McPherson, 24, 25, 28, 35 Method of Reading Weather Data, 46, 65, 66 Milliken, 142, 143 Motion Ratio, 31, 92, 93, 159 Move Weight, 145 MPH, 6, 49, 50, 51, 73, 88, 90, 97, 99, 101, 112, 160 
Natural Frequency, 92, 144 Number of Active Coils, 63 
Obs. Barometer, 46 Open, 5, 13, 19, 33, 43, 44, 81, 82, 97, 105, 106, 110, 117 Open Example, 13, 33, 43, 44, 106, 110, 117 Open Saved, 13, 33, 44 Optimize, 20, 127, 134 Other Specs, 27, 28, 29, 119 Outside Air Temp, 65, 66 Outside Rel Humidity, 65 Oversteer, 142, 143, 151, 160 
P Metric, 61 Panhard Bar, 28, 40, 42, 43 Panhard Bar Heights, 40 PDF, 135, 152, 161 PDF Printer, 161 Peak HP, 54, 55 Peak HP RPM, 54 Peak Torque, 54, 55 Peak Torque RPM, 54, 55 PERFTRNS.PTI, 2, 4, 84, 97 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Picture File, 161 
Pinion, 23, 38, 59, 109 
Plot Lines, 148 
Plus, Circle Track Analyzer, 159, 160, 161, 162 
Pnhd Bar to Centerline, 40 
power curve, 13, 14, 15, 53, 54, 68, 106, 114, 115, 141, 149, 161 
Preferences, 5, 11, 50, 141 
Print, 5, 1, 2, 7, 13, 24, 26, 33, 36, 38, 44, 49, 69, 75, 77, 85, 86, 91, 147, 148, 161, 162 
Quick Change, 59, 108, 109 
Radius, 51, 58, 61, 92, 93 
Rating Type, 60, 61 
Ratio of Trans Gear Used, 21 
RC cars, 161 
README.DOC, 2 
Rear anti-roll bar, 151 
Rear Axle Ratio, 19, 59, 97, 101, 108, 109 
Rear Axle Type, 19, 109 
Rear Squat, 129, 159 
Rear Suspension, 5, 1, 22, 37, 39, 43, 44, 62, 81, 84, 85, 91, 92, 105, 111, 115, 135, 141, 144, 149, 151 
Rear Track Width, 60 
Registered Owner, 3, 4 
Rel Humidity, 46, 47, 53, 65, 66 
Request Report Comment, 85 
Ride Height, 159, 160 
Roll, 1, 2, 9, 23, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 64, 65, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 117, 119, 122, 123, 124, 129, 134, 141, 144, 146, 147, 148, 151, 159, 160, 161 
Roll Bar Rate, lb/in, 92 
Roll bar, rear, 151 
Roll Center, 1, 2, 9, 23, 25, 28, 32, 33, 34, 90, 92, 117, 119, 122, 123, 124, 129, 134, 141, 144, 146, 147, 148, 151, 159, 160, 161 
Roll Center Calculator, 1, 9, 23, 33, 151, 159, 160, 161 
Roll Center Calculator Plus, 1, 9, 151 
Roll Center Migration, 141 
Roll Center, Force Based, 159 
Roll Center, Kinematic, 159 
Roll stiffness, 30, 91, 92, 93, 129, 149, 151 
Roll Stiffness, 91, 92, 93 
Rolling Radius, 61 
Roof Height, 60 
RPM at HP Peak, 55, 56 
RPM at Peak HP, 54 
Rule of Thumb, 91, 93, 94, 141, 151 
Running Conditions, 5, 20, 45, 50, 65, 66, 97, 98, 101, 111, 112 
Safety, 3 Satchell (Terry), 142 Save, 1, 5, 13, 14, 33, 44, 83, 84, 88, 115, 117, 147 Save As, 33, 44, 117 Scales, 78, 79 Scrub, 28, 30, 92, 93, 146, 151, 160 Scrub Radius, 28, 30, 92 Sec, 50 Setup, 13, 75, 91, 110, 148 
Shim, 33, 35 
Shock, 27, 31, 92, 123, 129, 151, 159 

Show Dive & Roll, 23, 31, 122 
Single Step, 91 
Spindle Angle, 28, 30, 35 
Spoiler, 19, 20, 151 
Spring, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 62, 63, 92, 117, 123, 160, 162 
Spring Compressn, 123 
Spring Deflection, 31 
Spring Front Height, 41 
Spring Length, 29, 63 
Spring Rate, 27, 29, 30, 39, 41, 42, 43, 62, 92 
Spring Rear Height, 41 
Spring Rear to Axle, 41 
Spring to Axle, 40 
Spring to Centerline, 40, 41 
Spring Width, 63 
Spring, Travel Limits, 159 
Sprocket, 59 
Squat, 129, 159 
Static Camber, 134 
Static Layout, 23, 28, 29 
Stiffness, 30, 91, 92, 93, 129, 149, 151 
Straight Axle, 28 
Suspension, 5, 1, 7, 9, 18, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 42, 43, 44, 47, 49, 58, 62, 64, 65, 69, 81, 84, 85, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 105, 110, 111, 112, 115, 117, 118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 124, 125, 129, 133, 135, 141, 144, 146, 147, 149, 151, 159, 160, 161 
Suspension Calculations, 91, 92 
Suspension Layout, 23, 25, 31, 32, 34, 42, 92 
Suspension Library, 117, 118 
T Bar Rate, 29 
T.Bar Arm to Centerline, 42 
Tech Help, 3, 4 
Test Results, 5, 14, 20, 49, 69, 74, 87, 89, 90, 91, 99, 101, 102, 103, 114, 123, 124 
Thick Lines, 11 
Thin Lines, 11 
Tire Change, 145 
Tire Diameter, 22, 60, 61, 141 
Tire Scrub, 141 
Tire to Centerline, 38, 40, 41 
Title Text, 161 
Titles, 77 
Torsion Bar Diameter, 63 
Torsion Bar Length, 63 
Torsion Bar Rate, 29, 30 
Torsion Bars, 29, 30, 42, 43, 62, 63 
Total Vehicle Weight, 58 
Total Weight with Driver, 18 
Track Length, 48, 104, 123 
Track Weather, 45 
Traction, 2, 21, 22, 51, 61, 62, 67, 90, 91, 109, 114, 122, 127, 129, 131, 132, 134, 142 
Traction Factor, 2, 22, 61, 62, 67, 109, 110, 114, 131 
Trailing Arm, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1999 Circle Track Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Transition, 142, 151 
Transmission, 12, 17, 21, 39, 59, 109, 132, 133 
Travel Limits, 159 
Tread, 22, 60, 61, 110 
Tread Width, 22, 60, 61, 110 
Truck Arm, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43 
Turn #, 50, 51, 90, 160 
Type, 13, 19, 21, 24, 28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 48, 59, 61, 62, 64, 67, 99, 109, 112, 131, 149 
Understeer, 142, 143, 151, 160 Upper Arm Angle, 27 Upper Arm Length, 27 Upper Ball Joint, 26, 28, 119, 120, 121, 123, 124 Upper Frame Pivot, 26 Upper Spring Pad, 27 Upper Strut Loc, 28 
Vehicle Library, 5, 6, 8, 69, 81, 83, 88, 98, 105, 115, 117 Vehicle Weight, 18, 53, 57, 108, 132, 133 Version 2, 1 Vol Eff, 54, 55 
Weather, 5, 8, 45, 46, 47, 65, 66, 85, 97, 111 
Weight %s, 53, 57, 90, 107, 108, 133 
Wet bulb, 65, 66 
Wet Bulb, 65, 66 
Wheel Rate, 27, 29, 30, 92 
Wheel Rim Diameter, 61 
Wheel/Tire, 21 
Wheelbase, 18, 58, 109 
Wheels & Tires Wt, 21 
Wind Resistance, 19 
Windows, 1, 2, 4, 5, 13, 14, 15, 19, 33, 43, 44, 75, 84, 89, 91, 97, 106, 135, 141, 148, 152 
Windows Print Setup, 33, 44 
Worksheet, 24, 33, 38, 44 
X&Ht Readings, 119, 120, 121 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
Appendix 4: New Features in Version 3.5 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features added since v3.2 was released.  Some we added to later versions of v3.2 and some are new in Version 3.5: 
• 
A major new feature is the concept of balancing the Front Lateral Load Distribution (FLLD) with the rear lateral load distribution.  This concept can be used to find a “balanced” setup by adjusting spring and roll bar rates, and roll center heights.  This is discussed in detail below. 

• 
The ‘Rule of Thumb’ Suggestions for a good starting point for a setup now includes a suggestion for the rear roll center height.  This is based on obtaining a recommended FLLD.  See details below. 

• 
The program can now do an angled, symmetric 4 link rear suspension, as used in the late model Mustangs and GM Metric chassis. 

• 
Added the ability to do Camber Change and Roll Center Migration tables and graphs in the Front Suspension Screen. 

• 
The Front Suspension Screen now calculates and displays 2 additional suspension characteristics: 1) Tire track change (tire scrub) as the front suspension goes through dive and roll.  2)  Swing Arm lengths, the length from the tire center to its instant center. 

• 
Changed the name of the Corner Jacking button at top right of main screen to Corner Weights.  That’s because 2 new options have been added, letting you do Tire Diameter/Circumference changes and weight/ballast movement to check the affect on corner weights 

• 
Screen colors are now more compatible with Windows XP. 

• 
Added ability to save a vehicle file to or open a vehicle file from a floppy disk or CD, with a default drive letter from A to Z, selectable in Preferences. 

• 
New Example files have been added, like GM Metric 4 Link Rear Suspension.. 

• 
Added 'Edit' options to the 'Calculate' menu item in the Engine Specs screen.  The new Edit options let you factor the power curves up or down, or re-sort the table if there are blank rows or RPM increments out of order. 


FLLD (Front Lateral Load Distribution) 
When a car makes a turn, weight is transferred from the inside tires to the outside tires.  However, how this weight transfer is split between the front and rear has a huge impact on the feel and handling of the car. If more weight transfer occurs on the front of the car, the outside front tire is being “overworked” more than the rear outside tire, causing less cornering traction at the front.  This is more likely to produce understeer or a push.  Very simplistically, if the Front Lateral Load Distribution is 50%, that means the 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
weight transfer split between front and rear is the same, and that should produce neutral handling.  The book “Race Car Vehicle Dynamics” by Milliken and Milliken (with assistance by Terry Satchell) discusses this concept in detail.  This concept is similar to the idea of balancing the front and rear roll angles presented in recent magazine articles. 
Figure A7 shows the program displaying the FLLD for the current vehicle (currently 43.4%, which would tend to oversteer) during the transition between releasing the brakes and going to the throttle, at the apex of the turn (transistion between braking and power).  During braking and under acceleration, the weight transfer is much more complicated, and the FLLD concept can not be as easily applied. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
Pick the 'Adjust' factor to tell the program what vehicle component(s) you want to adjust. Enter your desired 'For This FLLD', then click on the 'Find Now' button.  For perfect theoretical 'Balance', the FLLD should be 50%.  However, from experience, Milliken suggests a target 'starting point' FLLD value of 5 percentage points higher than the percent weight on the front tires (100% - Rear Wt % = Front Wt %).  By default, the program will load in this value, but you can change it to anything else you want.  Higher FLLDs tend to make the car tighter, with more understeer.  Lower FLLDs tend to make the car looser, with more oversteer. 
There are several ways to obtain a certain Front Lateral Load Distrbution percentage.   

The new settings you find using this feature MAY NOT BE THE BEST AND COULD BE UNSAFE. USE YOUR JUDGEMENT when making adjustments based on this concept. 
To reduce the possibility of using very strange settings, the program will calculate the average front and rear natural frequencies for the springs. If these frequencies are significantly different than those typically used, the program will warn you.  Typically, the front natural frequency will be in the range of 
1.4to 2.0 and the rear will be .1 to .5 points lower than the front. 
For many vehicle combinations, the program can not find settings to match your requirements.  Many times this is due to the Front or especially the Rear roll centers being too high.  High roll centers transfer more weight laterally through the suspension linkages and less through the springs, making the springs and roll bar have less effect on this tuning factor.  You may then want to have the program adjust the 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
Rear Roll Center to find the FLLD you desire.  After you adjust the Rear Roll Center and keep this change (click on OK/Keep), then you can go back into this screen and try adjusting springs and/or roll bar and they are likely to have more affect. 
If you find settings which you want to keep, click on OK/Keep and they will be loaded back to the vehicle specs screen.  For the Front and Rear Roll Center Heights for some suspension types, you must make a mental note of this setting and go back into the Front or Rear Suspension Screen and try various setting to arrive at this height.  The program can not make this change automatically for you. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A9 shows 2 reports which now also include references and suggestions based on balancing the FLLD. 
Corner Weights 

The screen in Figure A10 is used to determine how static corner weights change as you make adjustments to the car.  These adjustments include turning 'jacking screws' to adjust the preload on springs, changing tire diameter/circumference, and moving weight around like ballast.  Click on one of the 3 tabs at the top to choose your option.  The first tab, Jacking, is the same as it was in v3.2. 
For most all inputs on this screen, click on the name or input box and its definition is given in the section at the bottom of the tab page.  
For the Tire Change tab, choose which tire to change and which dimension you want to work with.  The program will then display the Current Tire dimension from the Vehicle specs screen.  You are allowed to 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
change this should it not be set exactly as you want.  Then enter the New Tire dimension and see the effect on Cross Weight.  Rear and Left percents are not affected by changing tire diameter. 
For the Move Weight tab, choose the type of weight change, and the amount of weight to change.  Then type in the Current Location of the weight and/or the New Location of the weight after the move.  Cross, Rear and Left percents can all be affected by moving weight. 
Click on Back (keep changes) at upper left of this screen to return to the main screen while keeping your changes to corner weights, tire sizes, vehicle weight, etc. 
Front Suspension Screen 
Figure A11 shows some of the new features for the Front Suspension Screen.  Figure A12 shows an example of the new “Table & Graph” feature for calculating Roll Center “migration” for various amounts of dive and roll. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
Lt and Rt Scrub shows in Figure A11 is the amount the tire moves out from the center of the car as it goes through the amount of dive and roll you have specified. 
Lt and Rt Swing Arm Length is the distance from the center of the wheel/tire to its instant center.  Long lengths indicate that camber will change little with dive and/or roll (Camber Gain will be low).  
Table & Graph 
If you click on Table & Graph at the Front Suspension Screen, you will obtain a screen similar to to the top picture in Figure A12.  This screen shows you 2 tables of Roll Center Height and Roll Center Left (distance left of center) for a set on Dive and Roll combinations.  Distances right of center are labeled as “negative”.  (Negative in not “bad”, it is just a way to indicate right, the opposite of Left.)  You could have also chosen to do a Camber Table.  Then the top table would be for the Right side and the bottom would be for the Left side. 
You can also select to have a Baseline condition displayed in the Table (Show Baseline Data).  This is useful to compare 2 different suspension layouts.  A Baseline is some previous condition which was shown in the Table.   
To save the current Table as a Baseline, click on 'Baseline', then 'Save This Data as Baseline'.  The program will ask you for a Comment to describe the Baseline condition.  This Comment will be printed with the Table when you print it if you are Showing the Baseline condition.  This comment can also be edited by clicking on 'Baseline' and then 'Baseline Comment'. 
After saving a baseline Table, you could close the Table by clicking on Back in the Menu Bar, make a change in the suspension and create the table again by clicking on Table & Graph.  You would produce a Table like in the upper left of Figure A12. 
Click on the Options menu item and select 'Specs for Table Rows & Columns' to change the Dive and Roll increments, and which is used for rows and which is used for columns.  You will obtain the menu shown in the upper right of Figure A12. 
As you change the specs in this menu, the Preview at the bottom changes to show what the Roll and Dive increments, and the general layout of the Camber Table will look like.  The program allows only up to 10 rows and 11 columns.  Your inputs may be changed if a combination produces more than these limits.  When you are satisfied with the Preview, click on OK/Exit.  Click on Cancel to close this menu and return to the original Table layout. 
Note: If you change the Table specs, any previously saved baseline conditions will be lost because that baseline has different increments for columns and rows, which would not match up to the new increments you have selected. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 



you highlight various rows by clicking and dragging the mouse in the top Table for the Right Side.  These selected (highlighted) rows, AND the corresponding rows in the bottom table for the Left side, will be graphed.  If you have selected more data than the Graph can hold, you will be told and the top and bottom rows only of what you’ve selected will be graphed. 
This screen graphs of Camber in degrees on the vertical Y axis versus either Roll or Dive on the horizontal X axis.  The data graph here is based on what was highlighted in the Camber table when you clicked on the Graph menu item.  Data is always graphed for the Left side as well as the Right side for whatever conditions you have selected (highlighted).  
If you make graphs of Roll Center Height and Roll Center Left, as done if Figure A12, this graph will show the actual location of the roll center and how it moves.  Height is on the vertical Y axis and Left is on the horizontal X axis.   
Read the labels in the "legend" at the right side of the graph to see which lines are which colors. The graph is always "autoscaled" which means the program picks the scales for drawing it to display all data with good detail. Print the graph on your printer using your Windows default printer by clicking on the "Print" menu command. You can change settings, labels and Windows printer setup by clicking on the "Options" menu command.  See Figure A13.  You can return to the Camber Table screen by clicking on the Back menu command. 

The Graph Options screen  is divided into 4 sections.   
The first section is called "Graph Labels":  Click on "Use Standard Labels" for standard labels to be printed on the graph.  Click on "Use Labels Given Here" and the program will use the labels 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
which you can enter or change. Click on any of the 3 text boxes and type in your chosen titles or labels.  
The second section of the Graph Options is called "Print": Click on "Black and White" or "Color" to tell the program how to print the graph.  Unless you have a color printer, you should choose "Black and White". The program always graphs in color on the computer screen.  Click on the "Print Now" button to print the current plot on the printer, the same as selecting the "Print" menu command.  Click on the "Windows Printer Setup" button to see the current printer selection or select a different printer for printing the graph. 
The third section lets you pick the line thickness for the "Plot Lines", either thick or thin.  
The fourth section lets you pick the color for the "Background Color" of the graph, either black or white. 
Click on OK to return to the Graph Screen with your changes in effect. 
Rear Suspension Screen 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
The new Suspension Type of Symmetric Angled 4 Link lets you find the roll center and roll stiffness of rear suspensions found in several vehicles, including GM Metric and later model Mustangs.  Because it is only for symmetric layouts, you will only enter measurements for 1 side, and they will be used for both sides. 
Engine Screen 
Edit options have been added to the Calculate menu item to allow factoring the power curve up or down by a certain percent.  The option is also available to “clean up” the power curve should you enter RPM increments out of order, or leave blank rows in the data. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
Appendix 5: New Features in Version 3.6 
In Version 3.6 we’ve broken the Circle Track Analyzer into 3 different programs: 
• 
Roll Center Calculator (RCC), which does the Front Suspension only. 

• 
Roll Center Calculator Plus (RCC+), which does the Front Suspension and Rear Suspension, plus some front to rear “balance” analysis. 

• 
The full Circle Track Analyzer (CTA), which does everything the old Circle Track Analyzer v3.5 did plus all these new features. 


Here is a listing of the major new features added in Version 3.6 of full Circle Track Analyzer.  Note that unless these new features specifically mention Roll Center Calculator, they do NOT apply to the Roll Center Calculator versions. 
• 
The program now lets you enter a rear anti-roll bar.  This input changes the front to rear roll stiffness, which affects most all of the handling ratings the program will calculate.  RCC+, CTA. 

• 
The program now lets you enter both a front and rear aerodynamic Lift Coefficient.  Many times when you make an aerodynamic adjustment, you only affect 1 end of the car, like a rear spoiler adjustment.  This adjustment not only affects overall “road holding” ability of the car, and therefore lap times, it also affects handling, the tendency to oversteer or understeer.  CTA only. 

• 
The program has a new Calculation Menu utility called “Adjust” for the front and rear Lift Coefficient and Drag Coefficient.  You can choose a type of vehicle modification, enter the starting and modified condition, and the program shows you how the current lift and drag coefficients would change.  This way you have an estimate of how certain vehicle modifications would affect the entire aerodynamics of the vehicle.  CTA only. 

• 
You can now enter more details about the front suspension, both for Double A Arms and McPhearson Strut suspensions.  This added detail lets you locate both the front and rear A Arm mounts on the frame, and the angle of the McPhearson Strut when viewed from the side.  These details let the program more precisely locate where the A Arm attaches to the frame in the 2 dimensional layout.  They also determine how much Anti-Dive is built into the front suspension. Anti-Dive is the vehicle’s resistance to diving the front end due to braking.  Reasonable starting points for Anti-Dive for most all circle track asphalt cars in the 2000-3500 lb range are 10% on the Right Front and 5% on the Left Front.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
We’ve taken the concept of balancing the Front Lateral Load Distribution (FLLD) with the rear lateral load distribution a step farther.  We’ve developed a Performance Trends exclusive called Oversteer/Understeer rating.  It is based on how evenly the tires on the 4 corners of the car are loaded. If they are equally loaded left to right, and loaded front to back the same as the front to back weight distribution, we say that is a 0 Oversteer rating, or Neutral handling.  Several 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 
factors go into this rating, including banking forces, aerodynamic forces, dynamic weight transfer left to right, and front to back.  CTA only. 
• 
You can display the actual wheel loads for the car in “transition” on the track, at the point where you are neither braking or accelerating. It is at this point where the program determines the Oversteer/Understeer rating described above.  For this “transition” condition, you can also save a “baseline” condition for comparison to some modification you have made to the vehicle.  This way you can actually see the effect you modifications will have on wheel loads and the handling rating.  CTA only. 

• 
The oversteer/understeer rating is displayed as the car goes around the track on the Analyze Suspension screen.  By saving a condition as a Baseline, you can compare your current conditions to a saved Baseline. This is the same as what is described in the preceeding paragraph except it is done at all locations on the track.  This is also the same as the “Analyze Suspension” feature in previous versions, except now it includes the front and rear aerodynamic downforce, and the handling rating.  CTA only. 

• 
The ‘Rule of Thumb’ Suggestions for a good starting point for a setup now includes suggestions for a “Big Bar Soft Spring” (BBSS) setup.  The BBSS theory is you use significantly softer front springs to better handle bumps in  the track, and to lower the car in the corners for less aerodynamic drag and less weight transfer inside to outside.  Then to counteract the additional roll these soft springs would allow, the anti-roll bar is stiffened significantly.  Other adjustments include a much stiffer than typical right rear spring, paying more attention to Anti-Dive and shock valving.  CTA only. 

• 
Improved the Tire Scrub calculation for a Double A Arm front suspension (how much sideways tire movement there is during dive and roll).  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
Refined the calculations for suggested spring rates for “Starting Point Suggestions” report.  CTA only. 

• 
Program is now more compatible with Windows Vista and Windows 7.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
Program is now better at remembering a printer or printer orientation changes.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 

• 
Program is now better at find newer versions of Adobe Acrobat and Reader, and other PDF compatible programs for viewing the User’s Manual.  RCC, RCC+ and CTA. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2008 Circle Track Analyzer Appendicies 






Figure A19 Oversteer/Understeer Rating Around the Entire Track, and Big Bar Soft Spring Starting Pont Suggestions 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 6 New Features in v4.0 
The Version 4.0 adds several features, including a totally new Plus version.  Now the program includes these 4 levels: 
• 
Roll Center Calculator v4.0  (front suspension only) 

• 
Roll Center Calculator ‘Plus’ v4.0  (front and rear suspension) 

• 
Circle Track Analyzer v4.0  (front and rear suspension, engine, vehicle, track and lap time simulation) 

• 
Circle Track Analyzer ‘Plus’ v4.0  (all CTA features plus advanced inputs and outputs) 


New Calculations 
Roll Center for Double A Arm and McPhearson Strut suspensions are now calculate using the Force Based Roll Center methodology.  This method is more accurate and realistic.  You will no longer see roll centers being calculated, say, 50 or 1000 inches beyond the track of the car, which never made much sense.  Force Based Roll Centers are more accurate than the old "Kinematic Roll Center" method of earlier versions.  There are options for you to display either or both, and go back to the old Kinematic Roll Center method in you want.  This is set under 'Options' in the Front Suspension (Roll Center Calculator) screen. Fig A20. 
The program's Lap Time and "On Track" Handling Calculations now include mass effects of the vehicle.  This will, produce more realistic handling, spring, and shock motion, body roll, dive, squat, etc as it goes around the track.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
You can now enter details about Bump Springs and Ride Height in the Front Suspension screen, and watch their effect as you go through dive, roll, and pitch.  Fig A21,  Fig A29.  
The program lets you specify if the shock is mounted in the middle of the spring, as with coil over springs.  Or you can specify if the shock is farther inboard or outboard of the spring and by how much.  This can greatly affect shock absorber performance and bump spring performance if it is mounted on the shock absorber.  Fig A21. 
IMPORTANT: If the Bump Springs are mounted on the shocks, the program will calculate the force the bump springs adds to the springs. For example, if the shocks are, say, 5” outside the springs, the bump springs will have more effect out there because the motion ratio is higher.  Let’s say the actual bump spring force is 400 lbs at the shock.  But at the spring itself, this could be the same as a bump spring on the spring adding 900 lbs.  The program will report this as 900 lbs because that is the effect on the suspension and handling. 
You can now include some simple shock absorber inputs which will affect the wheel loads and the handling ratings for the program's Lap Time and  "On Track" Handling Calculations.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A21 
IMPORTANT:  The vehicle dynamics simulation is assuming a perfectly smooth track and only smooth applications of throttle, brake and steering. In real racing this is hardly the case.  Real world, more abrupt changes in these inputs to the vehicle will have a large effect on shock velocities and therefore shock forces. 
The Circle Track Analyzer Plus version allows you to input more details about shocks and travel limits of the springs.  You can also import shock data from proper versions of the Performance Trends Shock Dyno software.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Version only.  Fig A21 – A24 B. 
Program now has refined the method of calculating the spring Motion Ratios for Double A Arm and McPhearson Strut suspensions to better match the Suspension Analyzer. 
The program will now calculate how much the Ball Joint/Spindle Angle changes as you go through suspension movement.  This will help you identify if the Ball Joints can go into bind, being pushed past the limit in Ball Joint Angle change.  Fig A28 
Program now calculates several suspension handling outputs each time you calculate a lap time.  These new outputs like Dive, Roll, Squat, etc can be reported or graphed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Original Report Data, version 3.6 or earlier 
Time  Feet  
MPH  Accel Gs  
% Throttle  Eng RPM  
Turn #  Curvature  
Downforce  Corner Gs  

New Report Data, Circle Track Analyzer v 4.0 
OSUS Factor  Left Camber  
Right Camber  R.C. Left  
R.C. Height  Roll  
Dive  Squat  
Left Scrub  Right Scrub  
L Upper BJ Angle Change  L Lower BJ Angle Change  
R Upper BJ Angle Change  R Lower BJ Angle Change  

New Report Data, Circle Track Analyzer v 4.0 Plus 
LF Tire Force  RF Tire Force  
LR Tire Force  RR Tire Force  
Total Tire Force  LF Bump at Tire  
RF Bump at Tire  LR Bump at Tire  
RR Bump at Tire  LF Spring Force  
RF Spring Force  LR Spring Force  
RR Spring Force  LF Shock Force  
RF Shock Force  LR Shock Force  
RR Shock Force  LF Shock Vel  
RF Shock Vel  LR Shock Vel  
RR Shock Vel  LF Ride Ht  
RF Ride Ht  F Aero Downforce  
R Aero Downforce  Change CG Ht  
L Bump Force  R Bump Force  

Program now has a more detailed Roll Bar Rate calculator with more inputs and better accuracy.  Fig A21, A26. 
The results now let you input or watch "Rear Squat" in the calculations, how much the rear suspension goes down measured from directly above the rear axle to the ground. 
The Oversteer/Understeer factor has been refined to be more realistic.  In earlier versions it depended too much on the front to rear weight distribution. 
Ride Height is now and input and you can watch Ride Height change as the car goes through Dive, Roll and Squat. Squat (the amount the rear ride height goes down) is a new input and output.  Fig A29   
New Features 
You can now write the results on the Reports screen to an ASCII data file for doing your own custom analysis in other programs, like Microsoft Excel.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Version only.  Fig A30. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
You can now shim the upper A Arms up or down in the Front Suspension (Roll Center Calculator) screen.  Fig A31. 
The program now will let you report more than double of the points as before when you go around the track, for more detailed analysis, reports and graphs.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
The engine screen and engine graph are now enlarged to show more detail.  Also, the Engine Screen has a note explaining the Max RPM and how critical it is to get that correct.  It also has a feature to help you enter data to realistically represent the power curve at its max RPM, past the HP peak.  The new version has several new crate motors added as examples.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A32. 
The program now works much better when closing the Analyze Suspension screen.  It also gives you 2 options of “Back” (simply closing the screen) or “Back (and save as baseline)”.  Previous versions would ask you each time you closed this screen if you wanted to save the current results as the Baseline.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. Fig A33. 
Many screens and input fields are now larger to accommodate longer file names.  Fig A34. 
The program now lets you pick which columns of output data to display and print under the "View" option on the Report Screen. These combinations of which columns to view can be stored as “templates” for easy recall in the future.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Version only.  Fig A35. 
"Modifieds” are now added to the list of general body types for Aero inputs in the Vehicle Specs screen.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
Program is much more streamlined for calculating the Handling Ratings from the Main Screen, and backing out of the "Analyze Handling Performance”  screen. Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
There is a new Option in the Front Suspension screen of allowing very small inputs for RC size cars. 
The program now works much better when calculating the handling rating.  Earlier versions could require you to do the calculation 2 times to work properly. 
Program now better remembers the handling rating when you enter other screens and do not make any modifications in that screen. Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
Program now does not let you enter screens from the main screen until all calculations are done refreshing the handling rating on the main screen.  This can avoid problems if you click through screens too fast.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
Fixed a bug where canceling from printing to a PDF printer could cause program to stop.   
Doubled the max size allowed for Comments to 800 characters. 
Printing 
Program has an added option for "Print Suspension Outputs" so you can print either the standard outputs, or the new handling outputs. Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
You can now load a picture file (.jpg) on the Main Screen and in the Front Suspension (Roll Center Calculator) screen and have it appear on printouts.  Fig A36, A38, A42. 
You can now specify a "Company Logo" (.jpg) file and 2 lines of “Title Text” to be included in your printouts.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus only.  Fig A37, A38.. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Program now lets you pick which columns of output data to display and print under the "View" option on the Report Screen.  If you select to print all data, only the columns displayed will be printed, up to 15 columns max.  Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A35. 
Program has an added a Preference for printer width adjustment. The program can now better print the title of columns of output, which could be up to 3 lines long of text. Help screens are now shown in Notepad so you can print them if you want. 
Graphing 
You can now graph up to 4 different data types on a graph.  Each of these can be assigned a factor, like “x 100”.  This way small numbers like “Bump at Tire” will show up if you also include very large numbers like “RPM” or “Spring Force”.  You can also save graph “templates” of various combinations of data and scaling factors under different names for use in the future.  Fig A39. 
You have a graph option of “(down shown negative)”.  If you choose one of these option, then a number like Dive will be graphed in the opposite direction. For example, if the Dive number increases, the graph line will go up on the graph.  However, the motion in the car is for the car to go down as Dive increases.  If you choose the “(down shown negative)” option, increasing Dive will be a graph line that goes down and can be easier to understand.  Fig A39. 
The program now lets you graph results from up to 6 different tests.  Fig A40.  
Because these larger labels can take up more space, and with up to 24 graph lines which can be graphed (4 data types and up to 6 different tests), there may not be enough space to display all labels.  Then the program will then produce "More" buttons which can appear either above or below these labels if they can not all be displayed on the screen, so you can scroll through all the labels. Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A40. 
There is now an option to Draw Segment Lines on the Graph Screen under Format.  If you choose this, vertical lines are drawn at the start of each turn and each straightaway.  These lines are drawn based on the current (latest) data.  So if the latest run was a 13 second lap time and the other runs you graph are about 16 seconds, these lines are based on the 13 second lap times.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only.  Fig A41. 
Background color choice is now checked in the dropdown menu in the Graph screen.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
The Graph Line Thickness has been adjusted to be slightly thinner for the "thick" settings.  Circle Track Analyzer and Circle Track Analyzer Plus Versions only. 
In the Graph Screen under Format, there is a new option for printing the graph labels larger than before.  Fig A41.   
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 




Figure A 22 Copying Shock Data from Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno Software 
If you have an appropriate Shock Dyno Plus version, you can click on the ‘Send’ option and be presented with the 4 corners of the car. For each corner you can select which shock or coil over’s data to send, or choose “None” for that particular corner. You may have to open other Shock Dyno files, do the Send and select different corners of the car for sending shock data for different shocks. 

As shown in the picture above, the Export Data will copy this data to the computer’s clipboard.  This is the same process as doing a Windows Ctrl-C or a Copy process. Therefore, do not do a copy or paste command before you go to your Circle Track Analyzer program to import this data. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 23 Importing Shock Data from Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno Software  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 24 A Importing Shock 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 24 B Manually Entering Shock Data 
A typical Shock Dyno graph is shown below, a graph of shock force vs absolute velocity. The graph shows both the compression and rebound force (positive and negative force).  But the velocity is only shown as a positive number, which is not actually correct. One reason for this is the industry does not have a common definition of positive and negative velocity.  In Performance Trends programs, we have defined that a positive 

So, if you have a shock dyno graph like above, just take the positive forces and assign them as occurring at a negative velocity. If done correctly, the graph will angle from the upper left down to the lower right as shown below. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 




Figure A 28 Ball Joint/Spindle Angle Change 
Positive Ball Joint/Spindle Angle Change means these angles are getting smaller. The Lower Ball Joint Angle actually got bigger in this case and produces a negative change. 
You can watch Ball Joint/Spindle Angle Change as you put suspension through motion. If this angle change is high, you are likely putting the ball joint into bind, pushing it beyond its limits. 
You can watch Ball Joint/Spindle Angle Change as you go around the track. You can also graph this data. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 29 Ride Height 
The location of where Ride Height is measured is shown by this square. 
Click here to bring up Ride Height screen. 
Use this screen to specify where Ride Height is measured and what Ride Height is at static conditions. 
Click on the “More Details” button (now showing “Hide Details” because “More Details” are being shown) to bring up this screen. 
If you have specified Ride Height details, you will see it here, both at static and dynamic conditions. In Plus version, Ride Height will also show up in the Reports and can be graphed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000  Circle Track Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure A 31 New Shim Up/Down Feature New Shim Up/Down features  New Camber and movement of upper A Arm mount.  

New screen where you specify how much to move the upper A Arm mount on the frame. 
Click here to use new condition, shown below. 
Tire with new Camber. New mount position. 
New Camber Here you can enter the highest RPM you have seen on your engine on the track, where the engine is still making some power. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020  Circle Track Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure A 32 New Engine Specs Screen Features  
Larger graph for more detail  

Click here to better estimate the highest RPM on the power curve. 
Click here for Example engines. 
New Crate Motors. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A 35 New “View” Option, Plus Version Only 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 36 Include Pictures with your Vehicle Files 
Click File button for these Options. 
If you choose Open, the program will typically default to the Vehicle Pictures folder, but you can browse to any folder on your computer. Note that if you move or change the location of the picture file you pick, it will not be found in the program and can not be used. For that reason it is best to keep a copy of a picture file in the Vehicle Pictures folder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 37 Include Company Logo and Titles on your Printouts, Plus Version Only 
Plus Version includes these Printing Options 
Browse to locate a .jpg file to use as your Company Logo file. 
Enter 2 lines of text to appear at the top of your printouts. You do this through 2 separate screens. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices Figure A 38 Include Company Logo and Titles on your Printouts, Plus Version Only, cont 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 





(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000  Circle Track Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure A 40 New Graph Features, cont  
Click History to bring up History Log shown below.  

Graphing up to 4 Data Types for up to 6 Tests can produce lots of graph lines and labels on the right side of the graph. 
Choose up to 6 tests to graph by clicking here to put a Yes in the Graph? column. 
These More buttons let you scroll the labels on the right up and down so they all can be read. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 41 New Graph Features, cont 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000  Circle Track Analyzer  Appendices  
Figure A 42 New Graph Features, cont  Plus version allows for logo and title lines.  

Vehicle picture from Main Screen gets printed here. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Circle Track Analyzer Appendices 
Drag Racing Analyzer v3.4 B for Windows 
User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
2 
Performance Trends, Inc. 31531 Eight Mile Rd, Livonia, MI 48152 Sales & Tech Help for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230  Fax: 248-442-7750 Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice Copyright (C) 2017 Performance Trends, Inc.  All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by Performance Trends, Inc. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp.  All Rights Reserved 
DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION OF FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE OF SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY OF OBLIGATION OF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES. PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
Continued on next page. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS OF PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS OF ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
********************************** W A R N I N G  *********************************** The Drag Racing Analyzer makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with engines and vehicles. The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-Obtaining data to input to the program
 -Interpreting the program's results 
Before making measurements of or modifications to any vehicle, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO: 
-Regard the safety consequences 
-Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 
-Read the entire user's manual 
-Obey all federal, state & local laws 
-Respect the rights and safety of others 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Overview of Features 1 
1.2 Before You Start 2 
1.3 A Word of Caution 3 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 4 
   1.5 Example to Get You Going                                 5 
Chapter 2 Definitions 11 
2.0 Basic Program Operation 11 2.1 Preferences 13 2.2 Engine 15 2.3 Transmission 21 
   2.4 Body & Axle                                           26 
2.5 Wheels & Tires 34 
2.6 Driving Specs 38 
2.7 Calculated Performance Test Results 49 
2.7.1 Calculate Performance Conditions 49 
2.7.2 Calculate Performance Test Results 55 
2.8 Calculation Menus 60 2.9 Match Vehicle Performance 74 2.10 Throttle Stop Prediction 77 2.11 Dial In Prediction 82    2.12 Example 87 
Chapter 3 Output 91 
3.0 Test Results       91 3.1 Analysis Report 93 3.2 Graphs 95 3.3 Vehicle Library 99 3.4 Printer Output 103 3.5 History Log 105 
Chapter 4 Examples 107 Example 4.1 Finding the Best Axle Ratio 108 Example 4.2 Using the Match Vehicle Performance Option 119 Example 4.3 Predict Bracket Racing "Dial In" 132 Example 4.4 Predict Throttle Stop to Run Index 138 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 143 Appendix 2: General Tips 147 Appendix 3: Version 3.2 Features 154 Appendix 4: Version 3.4 Features 163 Appendix 5: Version 3.4 B Features 169 Index 189 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features 
The Drag Racing Analyzer program by Performance Trends, Inc. is a software system to let drag racers, performance enthusiasts, and even the average driver understand and predict many aspects of full power vehicle acceleration. The Drag Racing Analyzer, Version 3 has been designed to be easier, faster and more accurate.  Several new features have been added and other features enhanced.  The major changes in Drag Racing Analyzer Version 3 are listed below: 
New Features: 
• 
Mouse driven user interface compatible with Windows and Window 95 for easier operation and better print capability. 

• 
Lots of example engines, transmissions, body styles, etc. preloaded for you to pick from. 

• 
Several ways to input engine power, from just peak HP all the way up to a full power curve of 10 RPMs.  You can also generate power curves from other simple inputs, your car’s actual specs and performance (MPH), or in a Windows Engine Analyzer and import it directly. 

• 
The Match Vehicle Performance option where you enter your car’s actual stall RPM, 60 ft time, MPH, finish RPM, etc and the program adjusts critical specs to match your actual performance. 

• 
You can have the program automatically pick ‘near optimum’ shift points. 

• 
Customize the method of entering weather conditions in up to 6 different ways, including altimeter, corrected or uncorrected barometer, relative humidity or dew point.  Also accepts wet/dry bulb temps. 

• 
After you’ve calculated performance, the Analysis Report will make notes about the run and suggestions for improving performance.  

• 
Converter stall RPM is automatically displayed as converter specs are changed. 

• 
On screen help by simply clicking on any input spec. 

• 
Graphs of Engine RPM, Acceleration Rate in Gs, Distance, MPH, available HP, etc to compare current results with a baseline run you can choose. 

• 
Special Dial In  and Throttle Stop prediction screens with separate Save, Open and Print features. 

• 
A History log of the last 25 runs is kept to track your modifications. 

• 
Calculation of Density Altitude and Dry Density Altitude (correcting for humidity level). 


If you require more detailed analysis or more features, you may need our Drag Racing Analyzer "Pro".  
Check Appendix 3, 4 and 5 for new features added to v3.2, 3.4 and 3.4 B. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
Computer capable of running Windows 98, Me, XP, 2000, NT, Vista, 7 or newer. 

• 
Printer (optional). 


Many terms used by the Drag Racing Analyzer and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, like Converter Capacity, Tire Traction Factor, etc.  However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Drag Racing Analyzer. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication. These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Drag Racing Analyzer directory or folder.   
A new feature also allows you to view the README.DOC file in the Drag Race Analyzer by clicking on Help at the main screen, then View Readme File. User Manuals and Supplements describing new features can also be viewed this way.. 
Every effort has been made by Performance Trends, Inc to provide you with an accurate, cost saving, high quality tool at a very reasonable price.  We do not copy protect our software, to allow our customers full freedom to make back-up copies for their own personal use. Please respect the programmer's copyright and do NOT give out copies to your friends.    
Important: The body of this manual covers v3.0’s features. Check Appendix 3, 4 and 5 for new features added in v3.2, v3.4 and v3.4 B. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
The Drag Racing Analyzer is a comprehensive software package which estimates a vehicle's performance based on limited user input.  These estimates can be used for analysis of drag strip or normal street performance.  A vehicle is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible.  Therefore, several simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level.  See the Assumptions in Appendix 1.  The user must recognize: 
The software can not predict the safety of a vehicle modification or driving situation.  Done correctly, with the proper quality parts and safety precautions, extreme vehicle conditions can be safe. Done by inexperienced racers with standard or low quality parts, a drag car can be a "disaster waiting to happen".  Please read and follow the "Safety Notes" as highlighted in this manual. 
The software, like any computer model, can NOT make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software is estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions within the program will limit the accuracy. 

• 
Environmental conditions, driver performance, track conditions, etc. are rarely constant and repeatable. 

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help you understand how an vehicle works; what parameters are important, how parameters interact, what are the tradeoffs, etc. 

• 
Point you in the correct, general direction for making modifications. This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, time slips, books, etc.  Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense to you. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all your data input. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Computer programs are written by normal people who can make mistakes.  It's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your phone call may help us correct it.) 


Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Drag Racing Analyzer from the distribution disks (a CD in version 3.2, floppy disks in older versions) to a hard drive before it will run.  To do this from a CD, simply install the CD in your CDRom drive and the Performance Trends Installation Wizard should automatically start, allowing you to install the Drag Racing Analyzer and demos of any of our other products. 
If the CD does not auto-run, then click on Start, then Run, then Browse and find your CD drive.  Then look for SETUP.EXE on the CD and run it to run the Installation Wizard. If you want to bypass the wizard, go into the Programs folder and run the Drag-Racing­Analyzer-v3.4­Installer.exe file. 
Follow the instructions of the SETUP program.  For most users, just click on OK for each question asked to accept the default answers suggested by the Setup program.  Once you have installed the Drag Racing Analyzer, there should be a Perf. Trends icon or program group for you to click on under “All Programs” after you click on Start at the lower left corner.  There should also be a Drag Racing Analyzer v3.4 desktop icon you can double click on.  That is how most users will start the progream. 
Entering Registered Owner's Name: 
During your first setup, the Drag Racing Analyzer will ask you to enter your name as the Registered Owner. During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied.  Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a code # based on the name.  Be sure you are happy with this name, as it will appear on printouts and on your screen. 
Click on About in the Main Menu to review your name and code # . 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Drag Racing Analyzer, click on the Drag Racing Analyzer icon on your desktop.  Or click on Start, then Programs, then Perf. Trends, and then Drag Racing Analyzer.  After some brief introduction screens, you will be left at the Main Menu shown below. 
Figure 1.1 Main Menu 

GT5.0L is name of Vehicle Specs currently being worked with 
Click here to display all vehicle’s saved in Vehicle Library 
Click here 
to display 
the menu 
shown in 
Figure 1.2 
From this main menu, you can:                                            
• 
Choose to review or modify any of the categories of vehicle specifications displayed. 

• 
Open or Save a file of complete vehicle specifications by clicking on the Open or Save buttons (first 2 buttons on the left) or the File menu item, then either Open or Save. 

• 
Add, edit or review vehicle comments to describe the vehicle currently held in the program.   

• 
Calculate vehicle performance from the options listed under Calculate Performance.  From here you can specify calculation options (barometric pressure, humidity, track length, etc.). 

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for you. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help or pressing <F1>. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit, or click on the Quit button. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
In the Main Menu’s blue title bar you will notice the current Vehicle is [GT5.0L].  The program has descriptions of vehicles saved in the Library right from the factory.  The current file from the Vehicle Library is called GT5.0L.  
To get started, let's examine (but not change) the various categories of specs.  Click on a button for one of the categories like Engine, Transmission, etc.  A new menu will appear displaying the various specs and the current values for the GT5.0L vehicle.  You can click on the name of any spec and a brief description appears in the Help frame, along with a page #  from this manual for more help.  You can return to the Main Menu by clicking on OK or clicking on an area outside this menu. 
Now click on the Calculate Performance button in the Main Menu to calculate performance for this GT5.0L vehicle. The next menu will show you the Calculate Performance Conditions menu as shown in Figure 1.2. 
For now, leave all the Calculation Conditions as they are and click on the Calculate Performance button.  This will start the program calculating performance for the specifications of the GT5.0L stored in the Vehicle Library with the Calculation Conditions currently displayed.  A progress bar graph shows how the calculations are progressing.  The calculations may require several seconds on slower computers.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
The final results will appear in a table as in Figure 1.3.  The columns are for various types of readings (gear #, MPH, etc) which occurred at critical points in the run, like the start, the end of each gear, beginning of each gear, 60 foot time, 60 MPH, etc. 
The results contain much information, some which may not be familiar to you.  However, the first three columns do look familiar: 
If you look at the last row, you see a Time of 14.54  and a MPH of 95.7, or the car ran a 14.54 ET at 95.7 MPH.  If you look in the upper right corner you see a Summary of the Current and Last performance, including a “Improvement” or how much the current performance is better than the previous results.  You’ll notice that the 94.94 MPH in this section is slightly less than the MPH at the end of the MPH column.  That is because a drag strip uses 2 timing lights spread over the last 66 ft of drag strip to measure top speed through the traps.  These lights give a slightly lower MPH than the car actually ran at exactly 1320 feet.  To summarixe, the MPH in the Summary best matches the MPH on a quarter mile time slip. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Figure 1.4, Calculated Results with Help Definition 

Click here or press the F1 key for general help on what your options are at this point in the program. 
By clicking on a number in the results, an explanation and definition is given, including a page number in this manual for more information. 
The menu bar and the command buttons at the top of the screen shows some of the options for various formats for data output: 
• 
Analyze will produce a report of performance and safety tips on the test results 

• 
Graph will produce various types of graphs. You can also compare the current results to results of the previous run, or some other Baseline you have saved. 

• 
Print lets you print these results on your printer. 


If you have a printer hooked up to your computer, try the Print command by clicking on Print in the menu bar or on the Printer button. A small menu of printout options are presented.  These options allow you to enter a report comment, include vehicle specs and comments in the printout, etc.  These options are explained in Section 3.4. For this first time, accept the default settings and print the report by clicking on Print Results. 
To help explain the other columns of output, simply click on those results.  A definition of that particular data will be presented in a Message box as in Figure 1.4.  Then click on OK when you have read the definition. 
For a detailed explanation of all the results, Calculation Conditions, and output options, go to Section 2.7 and Chapter 3. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Clicking on Back or pressing the <ESC> key will return you to the Main Menu.  From the Main Menu you can modify the GT5.0L to see the effect on performance.  For example you could go into any of the component menus and: 
• 
Change to a different rear axle ratio. 

• 
Install ‘stickier’ tires. 

• 
Change weather or wind conditions. 


The beauty of the program is that it repeats exactly each time.  This lets you find differences which would be “clouded” by changes in track conditions or driver variations. 
Many of the input specifications you see in the various menus may not be familiar to you.  For a brief definition of the inputs, simply click on the specification name.  The definition will appear in the Help frame with a page # in this manual for more info. 
Some of the vehicle specifications have “Clc” buttons.  One example is Dew Point in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu.  “Clc” stands for "calculate".  For example, if you want to calculate the Dew Point from wet and dry bulb readings, simply click on the Clc button.  The program will display a new menu listing the inputs and the Calc Dew Point from these inputs.  For further explanation, click on the Help buttons in these menus. To use the Calc Dew Point calculated from these inputs, click on the Use Calc Value button.  Otherwise click on Cancel to return to the Calculate Performance Conditions menu with no change to Dew Point.  Section 2.8, Calculation Menus explains all these calculations. 
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various performance calculations, read Section 3.3 of this manual called Vehicle Library to learn how to save a set of vehicle specifications or recall information which has been previously saved.  Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction (C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Figure 2.1 shows the Drag Racing Analyzer’s Main Menu with explanations of your options here.  Figure 
2.2 shows the Body & Axle menu with explanations of options for most component menus. 
Figure 2.1 Main Menu Options 
Menu bar. Click here for “drop down”Buttons to display menus of program options, some beingindividual menus the same as the Command Buttons.
containing vehicle and Name of current vehicle filedriving specs. 

Command buttons to save or retrieve a vehicle file, calculate performance, and perform other special calculations 
This area gives a general description or summary of each of the 5 menus of specs which make up a vehicle 
Enter comments to describe vehicle 
Click here to display Calculation Conditions (weather, track length, etc), and then calculate performance. Move mouse over an area and a description of the item is given here 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.2 Explanation of Sections of Typical Menu Name of specs. Click on them for a description in the menu’s help frame. 
Help frame giving definition of spec and page # in manual for more info. 
Drop down combo box. Click on down arrow button on the right side to pick from a list of possible choices for this spec. 
Standard text entry box where you can type in the value of the spec (which will be checked against acceptable limits). 
Calculation button which opens up another menu where you can calculate the value of a spec from other inputs 
Click here to 
close menu. 
Click here to obtain 1 to several screens of help to explain this menu. 
Click here to display lists of examples of specs for this menu 
Click here to save the appropriate current specs in this menu as an example in the list of example specs. 
Is the name of the example specs (if an example was used) or else called something like “Use Specs Below” where specs are not from an example or are modified from an example. Other options include “Let program estimate specs”. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.1 Preferences 

Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Menu screen to drop down the Preferences shown in Figure 2.3.  Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. 
Sec Increments 
Click on .01 for times like ET, 60 foot time, Dial In predictions, etc to be given to the nearest hundredth of a second. This will have calculations run about 5 times faster.  If you have a faster computer and/or want better precision, select .001 for times to be calculated to the nearest thousandth of a second. 
Beginner/Experienced Level 
If you select Beginner, the program will lock out the more complicated features, make more checks on specs assuming you could be making mistakes, and gives more explanation before an action is performed (assuming you may not be familiar it).  We strongly recommend this choice to anyone new to computers or this program. 
Remind on Tire Wt Change 
Select this option and the program checks if you have made a significant weight change to the wheels or tires in the Wheels/Tires menu.  If you have the program will ask if you want the same weight change to be made to the total vehicle weight. 
For example, if you are installing lighter wheels and tires on your street car, you probably want the vehicle weight lightened by the amount the wheels and tires are lighter than the original ones.  However, if you are running a class where your vehicle weight must remain at a certain level, you can gain an advantage by reducing the weight of the wheels and tires (reducing rotating inertia), but then adding ballast to the car so the total weight stays the same.  This is a case where you do not want the vehicle weight changed by the amount you lightened the wheels and tires. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Engine Graph - Thick Lines Engine Graph - Thin Lines 
Lets you customize the way the Full Power Curve graph in the Engine specs menu is displayed and printed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.2 Engine 
The Engine specs describe the engine's size in cubic inches, its torque and HP, and what power correction was used for rating the engine’s torque and HP. 
Figure 2.4 Engine Specs Menu (shown with Full Power Curve) Click here to set the amount of detail you want to give the program about the power curve. For beginners, we strongly recommend selecting Peak HP Only or picking example power curves. 

Torque and HP graph based on data in table below it. Note that HP has a separate scale on the right side 
Click here to print power curve and table. 
Click here to load a power curve from an Engine Analyzer program 
Click here or here to calculate power curve specs from other simple inputs. 
Click here to blank out table to enter new numbers 
Certain sections will be disabled (grayed out) depending on your 
choice of Method of Describing Power Curve 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Method of Describing Power Curve 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Peak HP Only 

• 
Peak Torque and HP Only 

• 
Full Power Curve (which enables the 4 command buttons in this section as shown in  Figure 2.4) 

• 
Pick an Example 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen and example)  


Depending on your choice, the appropriate sections, buttons and inputs will be disabled (grayed out) and you will not be able to access them. 
Displacement, cu in 
The engine’s cubic inch displacement is used for 2 things: 
• 
First it is used to determine the shape of the power curve from limited user input, especially in the case of specifying Peak HP Only. 

• 
It is used to estimate the amount of rotating inertia * in the engine and clutch/flywheel or converter.  The bigger the cubic inches, the larger the assumed rotating inertia. 


Therefore, even if you are specifying the Full Power Curve, enter the cubic inches to let the program better estimate the engine’s rotating inertia. 
* Definition of Engine Inertia:  The engine inertia is a measure of how massive the engine's rotating components are and how difficult it is to accelerate or decelerate the engine itself.  Most of the engine's inertia is contained in the flywheel/clutch assembly for a manual transmission, or in the torque converter for an automatic transmission.  The more massive or the larger the diameter the flywheel or any rotating engine component, the larger the inertia value. 
Peak Torque, ft lbs 
This is the maximum torque value for the vehicle's engine.  This information is listed in magazine articles, owner's manual/repair manual or from dynamometer tests.  See Appendix 2.  If this value is not known, one of Performance Trends’ Engine Analyzer programs will help you measure or estimate the engine's maximum torque.  If you have no information on Peak Torque, we recommend you select one of the example curves, select the Method of Describing Power Curve of Peak HP Only to eliminate this spec, or click on the Clc button to calculate Peak Torque from other inputs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
RPM at Peak Torque 
This is the RPM at which the peak torque occurs.  This is listed in magazine articles, in the owners/repair manuals or dynamometer tests with the peak torque value (for example, 265 ft lbs @ 2800 RPM).  The RPM  at Peak Torque must be  lower than the RPM at Peak HP.  If you have no information on RPM at Peak Torque, we recommend you select one of the example curves, select the Method of Describing Power Curve of Peak HP Only to eliminate this spec, or click on the Clc button to calculate Peak Torque from other inputs. 
Peak Horsepower 
This is the maximum horsepower value for the vehicle's engine.  This information is listed in magazine articles, in an owner's manual/repair manual or from dynamometer tests.  See Appendix 2. If this value is not known, one of Performance Trends’ Engine Analyzer programs will help you measure or estimate the engine's maximum horsepower.  If you have no information on Peak Horsepower, we recommend you select one of the example curves, or use  Calculation Menu by clicking on the Clc button, or use the Match Vehicle Performance option and let the program estimate your peak HP. 
RPM at Peak HP 
This is the RPM at which the peak HP occurs.  This is listed in magazine articles, in the owner's/repair manuals or dynamometer tests with the peak torque value (for example, 189 HP @ 5200 RPM).  The RPM at Peak HP must be higher than RPM at Peak Torque if you are using the Peak Torque spec.  If you have no information on RPM at Peak HP, we recommend you select one of the example curves or estimate it at an RPM 500 RPM less than your shift RPM. 
Corr. Factor 
Since engine performance is strongly influenced by weather conditions, it is important to specify the conditions which give the torque and HP values you enter. For production engines, torque and HP values are corrected to conditions standardized by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE).  These conditions are approximately 29.6" Hg, 77 degrees F and 49 degrees F dew point (humidity) as specified by SAE procedure J-1349.  For these engines, click on the down arrow of this combo box and select “SAE (29.6 77 deg)”. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Dynamometers which mostly test racing engines (typical of magazine articles) generally correct their data to 29.92" Hg, 60 degrees F and approximately 0 degrees F dew point (no humidity). For  these engines, select “Std Dyno (29.92  60 deg)”. 
Full Power Curve Features 
There are several ways to load in RPM, torque and HP data into the table on the right side of the Engine menu.  You can Calculate one based on simple inputs, you can load an Example curve, you can load a curve calculated from one of our Windows Engine Analyzer Programs, or you can simply type in readings.  If you type in readings, as soon as there 2 readings for any set of 3 inputs, the 3rd one is automatically calculated and filled in, and the new point is added to the graph. 
The graph always shows a sharp drop in power after the highest RPM point in the table.  This is to remind you that this is what the program assumes for calculations, that engine power drops significantly (like it ran into an overspeed) after the highest RPM.  If you want the power to not drop so suddenly, then you must add an additional RPM above your current highest RPM, and enter a HP reading which draws the curve like you expect it to look. 
Command Buttons 
Three of the command buttons in the Full Power Curve section are rather self explanatory: 
• 
Clear will blank out all the RPM, torque and HP entries. 

• 
Calculate will calculate a power curve from simple inputs.  See Section 2.8.1 on this Calculation Menu, which is the same as the Clc buttons bring up for the simpler power curve inputs in the left section. 

• 
Print will print the graph and table of power curve data. 


The other command “Load from Eng. Anlzr.” will be discussed in more detail below. 
Load from Eng. Anlzr. 
The Drag Racing Analyzer can load engine power curves created by the proper Windows versions of Engine Analyzer EZ, the standard Engine Analyzer, and Engine Analyzer Pro.  It is recommended that both the Engine Analyzer and Drag Racing Analyzer are loaded on a hard drive (C or D drive). 
Generally you will start this process by running the Engine Analyzer program first.  Once the Calculated Performance results have been calculated and displayed on the screen, click on the Send button in the Engine Analyzer. This Engine Analyzer menu looks similar to Figure 2.5.  It will ask what program do 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
you want to send the power curve to, where you could click the Drag Racing Analyzer option.  There are other options which you can refer to your Engine Analyzer manual. 
The process of loading Engine Analyzer results into Drag Racing Analyzer is nearly automatic and consists of: 
1. 
Once you’ve selected the Drag Racing Analyzer as the program to Send the results to, click on  the OK/Send button in the Engine Analyzer’s Send menu to leave the Engine Analyzer. 

2. 
The Drag Racing Analyzer will be automatically activated and run. 

3. 
When the Drag Racing Analyzer stars up the first time, you are given notice that a power curve is available and can be loaded from the Engine specs menu.  You will also notice some new commands on the Main Menu called “Engine Analyzer”.  Clicking on these will return to control to the Engine Analyzer program which originally called the Drag Racing Analyzer, but will leave the Drag Racing Analyzer also running, ready for a new power curve. 

4. 
Important:  Once you load the power curve, the old power curve is gone, unless you saved the vehicle specs including power curve with the Save command or saved it as an Example by clicking on the Save Example button at the Engine specs menu. 

5. 
When you are ready to return to the Engine Analyzer, simply click on one of the Engine Analyzer buttons (at the Main Menu or in the Test Results screen) or commands in the Menu bar. You do not have to load the power curve. You can jump between the Engine Analyzer and Drag Racing Analyzer as many times as you want. 


If an Engine Analyzer program is not currently running and “talking” to the Drag Racing Analyzer, you can also start the process by clicking on the Load from Eng. Anlzr. button.  You will get the screen of Figure 2.5. 
Troubleshooting 
If this process of loading  power curves into the Drag Racing Analyzer from the Engine Analyzer does not work like described above, consider the following.  
• 
You do not own the correct Windows version of Engine Analyzer program. 

• 
You have renamed the Drag Racing Analyzer or Engine Analyzer executable (.EXE) file. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
The Drag Racing Analyzer should be DRA.EXE.   
• 
In the Engine Analyzer program, click on the “Look for It” button by the Drag Racing Analyzer option to see if the program can find a correct Windows version. 

• 
You are trying to help the programs transfer control to each other.  Do not minimize one of the programs, then activate the other program as this can confuse the process. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.3 Transmission 
The Transmission specs describe the clutch or torque converter and the transmission's efficiency and gear ratios. 
Appendix 5, page 169, New Features in v3.4 B discusses new transmission inputs added. 
Figure 2.6 Transmission Specs Menu Click here to select either clutch or torque converter, to let the program estimate clutch specs or to pick an example clutch or torque converter. 
Click here (on on Pick Example button below) to pick an example. 

For torque converters, full power stall RPM is shown here for the current engine power curve and track weather conditions. Refer to this as you adjust converter capacity, or simply enter your full power Stall RPM here and the Capacity will be figured for you. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Clutch/Converter 
Type 
Identifies if coupling between the engine and the transmission is through a friction clutch or hydrodynamic torque converter consisting of an impeller, turbine and reactor (or stator), typical of most automatic transmission converters.  Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs (recommended for most users using clutches) 

• 
Use Clutch Specs Below 

• 
Pick Example Clutch 

• 
Use Converter Specs Below 

• 
Pick Example Converter 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen a clutch or converter example)  


Depending on your choice, the appropriate sections, buttons and inputs will be disabled (grayed out) and you will not be able to access them. 
Clutch Diameter, inches 
Identifies the outside diameter of the clutch disk measured in inches.  If the Clutch Diameter can not be easily measured, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 
Clutch Force, lbs 
Identifies the clamping force the pressure plate exerts to squeeze the clutch disk(s).  Manufacturers of aftermarket, racing type pressure plates generally specify this force in lbs (pounds of force). If you do not know this force, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 
# Clutch Disks 
Is the number of clutch disks, which will be 1 for most all production type clutches.  Only special racing clutches will have more than 1 disk, perhaps 2, 3 or 4 disks. If you do not know the # Clutch Disks, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Clutch Material 
Is the material of the clutch disk, either organic (sometimes called a “rag” clutch which is an older style material) or metallic (which is common in most racing clutches). If you do not know the Clutch Material, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 
Converter Capacity 
Describes the size or capacity of the torque converter in units of RPM per square root of torque (ft lbs).  The higher the capacity (sometimes called "K" factor), the higher the converter slip for a given amount of input torque.  High capacity converters are generally smaller in diameter, have internal blade modifications and are rated by their stall RPM for a given amount of engine input torque.  Stall RPM is the engine RPM at full throttle when the converter output RPM is 0, which occurs with the transmission in gear with the drive tires not turning (trans brake is On).   
Technically, if you know the engine’s torque at stall, Converter Capacity can be calculated by the following equation: 
Converter Capacity = 
Stall RPM 


Engine Torque @ Stall 
High capacity torque converters are used in drag racing primarily to allow the engine to rev into it's high RPM power band at the line.  However, high capacity converters generally have more slip at high speed, possibly lowering your quarter mile MPH. 
Note:  You may wonder why you can't just use the converter's stall RPM, instead of Capacity.  The fact is a converter does not have a single stall RPM, but a different stall RPM for various amounts of engine torque.   
For example, when an engine is idling against a stalled torque converter the "stall RPM" is the idle RPM. Open the throttle slightly and produce more torque and the "stall RPM" increases.  How stall RPM changes with various amounts of engine torque is defined by Converter Capacity. Only by using Converter Capacity can you accurately see how stall RPM and vehicle performance changes with changes in engine output torque.  Engine torque can be affected by many things, including weather, % throttle, engine modifications, etc. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Conv Tq Multiplication 
Describes the amount of torque multiplication produced by the torque converter at stall (when the drive tires are not turning).  A torque converter increases engine torque at stall, similar to a gear box.  As the vehicle starts to move and converter output RPM increases, torque multiplication drops.  At higher converter output RPMs, torque multiplication eventually reaches 1:1 (no torque multiplication but no torque loss). The Conv Tq Multiplication spec is generally not available from converter manufacturers (but it should be). Unless you know your converter’s torque multiplication, use a value of 2. 
Transmission 
Type 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Use Specs Below 

• 
Pick Example Transmission 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen a transmission example)  


The major differences between an automatic or manual transmission in this program are: 
• 
An automatic transmission uses a torque converter.  This you select in the Clutch/Converter section. 

• 
An automatic transmission has higher power losses due to the pump and larger areas for fluid 


friction.  This is represented by the Efficiency, % spec in the Transmission section. The program will let you  combine a clutch with an automatic transmission (lower Efficiency rating) or a torque converter with a manual transmission (higher Efficiency rating).  It also lets you combine any combination of example clutches, converters and transmissions. 
Efficiency, % 
Is the amount of power which actually leaves the transmission compared to the amount which entered the transmission gets from the engine.  Automatics are about 3-6 % less efficient than manual transmissions.  The more “heavy duty” the transmission, the less efficient (larger bearing areas).  The fewer the number of gears, the more efficient the transmission.  Click on the down arrow key to pick an efficiency from the list. Examples of  transmissions with these efficiencies are also given in this list. 
Note:  You can pick any efficiency, even though the label does not match your car.  For example, say you are working with a Ford C6 rated at “88% 60s Hvy Dty 3 spd Auto”.  You have made some improvements like going to a lighter fluid.  Simply select an efficiency which is 1 to 2% higher than what you currently have Efficiency set at, even though 89% is called “89% 60s AWD 3 & 4 spd Auto”.  The Efficiency of 89% is still slightly better than 88%, even though you do not have All Wheel Drive.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
First (1) Gear Ratio Second (2) Gear Ratio Third (3) Gear Ratio Fourth (4) Gear Ratio Fifth (5) Gear Ratio Sixth (6) Gear Ratio 
Are the gear ratios in the transmission.  If you do not know your transmission’s gear ratios, select one of the examples.  Even though your transmission is not listed, select one with the same number of gears.  This will be closer than guessing. 
Appendix 5, page 169, New Features in v3.4 B discusses new transmission inputs added, including allowing up to 10 gear ratios. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.4 Body & Axle 
The Body & Axle specs describe the vehicle size, weight, suspension, final drive system and aerodynamics. 

Figure 2.7 Body & Axle Specs Menu Select to pick an Example of Body
Vehicle Weight and Final 

Details Specs or select Use Specs Drive Ratio (rear axle ratio) Below and enter in your own specs.
are very critical for accurate predictions. 
Vehicle Weight Vehicle Weight, lbs 
Total vehicle weight in pounds with the driver.  For accurate predictions the weight you enter here is critical. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Axle Specs: 
Final Drive Ratio 
For rear wheel drive vehicles, this is the rear axle ratio; for front wheel drive vehicles, this is the gear ratio of the final drive gear or chain system in the transaxle.  For chain drive vehicle's (go carts, motorcycles, etc.) this is the chain ratio.  For motorcycles with a gear reduction between the engine and the transmission, you must multiply the chain ratio by this gear reduction to obtain the total Final Drive Ratio.  Click on the Clc button to obtain a menu to calculate Final Drive Ratio based on number of teeth for your particular situation. 
This information is available in magazine articles, owner's-repair manuals, on tags attached to the vehicle, or coded into the vehicle's identification number.   
One method of estimating the final drive ratio of a rear wheel drive vehicle without locked differentials (where the driveshaft is exposed) is to jack one of the rear tires off the ground, leaving the other rear tire on the ground.  Mark a spot on the driveshaft.  Rotate the tire which is off the ground exactly 2 complete revolutions.  The other tire must remain still (which it  will if you do not have a locked differential).  Count the number of revolutions the driveshaft turns.  This indicates the final drive ratio.  For example, if the driveshaft turns 3.5 times, the final drive ratio is 3.5. 
If you have a locked differential, the procedure is the same except you must have both rear wheels off the ground, and you rotate the tire only 1 turn (not 2). 
Safety Precaution:  This procedure should be attempted only by experienced mechanics, taking the proper safety precautions.  This procedure may not be possible for racing axles with locking differentials or "spools". 
Diff Lock Eff, % 
The final drive differential in either a front wheel drive's transaxle or rear wheel drive's rear axle can be either a locking type ("posi-traction", "traction-lock", etc.) or an "open differential" with no locking.  The locking type of differential tries to put the most power to the drive tire with the most traction. 
Production locking differentials do not do this perfectly, but some racing differentials do lock up completely.  Perfect lockup (100% lockup) can also be accomplished by welding the differential gears solid or by installing a "spool" to replace the differential.  Both of these modifications cause problems when turning corners, since now both drive tires must turn at exactly the same speed. 
The effectiveness of the differential's lockup also depends on the type of suspension for the drive axle.  Click on the down arrow of this combo box to select the description which best describes your car. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Notes: 
This specification is ignored if the Driveline Layout is set to Front or All Wheel Drive or Motorcycle.  For Front Wheel Drive, the computer assumes a high  % lockup due to the front wheel drive's assumed independent front suspension. 
If the lockup is specified as 100%, then the specifications Rear Track Width and Frt Roll Stfns have no effect on the results and are disabled. 
Body Details 
Type 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Use Specs Below 

• 
Pick Example Body 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen a body example)  


Driveline Layout 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box to tell the program where the driving wheels are, or if you have a motorcycle.  If you specify All Wheel Drive (same as 4 wheel drive), be sure to select a lower Transmission Efficiency to account for extra losses in the transfer case. 
% Wt on Rear Tires 
Describes the vehicle's weight distribution, indicating the % of the vehicle's total weight which is on the rear tires.  This information can be found in magazine road tests or owner's/repair manuals.  An example would be "weight distribution = 55/45" which indicates 55% of the vehicle's weight is on the front tires when the vehicle is stationary, and 45% is on the rear tires. 
It is also possible to measure the vehicle's weight distribution by weighing the vehicle with all 4 tires on the scale, and then weighing it with only the rear tires on the scale.  (Both weighings should be done with the driver and with the vehicle level.)  Then use the formula: 
Formula to Calculate % Wt on Rear Tires 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
% Wt on Rear Tires = Wt for Rear Tires Only x 100 Total Vehicle Weight 
For example, if the total vehicle weight is 4000 lbs and the rear tire weight is 1800, the Weight on Rear Tires is 1800 / 4000 x 100% = 45%. 
Since % Wt on Rear Tires has a Clc button, this calculation is computerized as shown in Section 2.8.3. 
Height of CG 
Figure 2.8, Estimate of Height of CG
Describes the height of the 
vehicle's center of gravity from level ground.  A 
sports car will have a lower 
Estimated 
CG than a 4WD truck.  
Height 
Increasing the height of the 
of C.G.  
CG (installing a lift kit) will improve weight transfer and therefore traction in a rear wheel drive car for improved acceleration capabilities.   
Ground  

Height of Front 
                                 of Crankshaft Safety Precaution:  Transferring this weight to the rear means less weight is being applied to the front tires.  Therefore, steering control can be adversely affected creating unsafe conditions. 

This information is not readily available, but can be estimated by measuring the distance from the ground to a spot approximately 5 inches above the center of the engine's crankshaft at the front of the engine (typical V-8 camshaft level).   
Estimate the Height of CG of motorcycles as half way between the rider's shoulders and the engine's crankshaft.  For example, if the height of the rider's shoulders is 40" and the crankshaft centerline is 14", the Height of CG would be (40 + 14) / 2 = 27".  Obviously, driver position has a significant effect on this parameter. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Wheelbase 
Is the distance in inches from the center of the front wheels to the center of the rear wheels.  Decreasing the wheelbase will improve weight transfer and therefore traction and E.T. on a rear wheel drive car. 
Rear Track Width, in 
Is the distance in inches from the center of one rear tire's track to the center of the other rear tire's track.  This value is used in conjunction with Frt Roll Stfns, % for determining how RWD vehicles "lift" the right rear tire.  For front wheel drive cars, certain assumptions are made about the suspension, and this value is disabled. 
Frt Roll Stfns, % 
Figure 2.9, Estimate of Rear Track Width 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Roll stiffness is the suspension's resistance to leaning as it goes through a cornering maneuver.  Part of the vehicle's total roll stiffness comes from the front suspension, and the rest comes from the rear.  Frt Roll Stfns, % is the percent of the vehicle's total roll stiffness present in the front suspension. 
For example, if the vehicle has a heavy rear anti-sway bar with stiff rear shocks, and no front anti-sway bar with soft front springs and shocks, only 25% of the vehicle's roll stiffness may be from the front suspension.  This particular set-up is good for "planting" both rear tires on the ground for good traction with a rear wheel drive car. 
Assume the Frt Roll Stfns, % is 75% (typical of most production cars) unless special modifications have been done to the suspension for drag racing.  Then reduce it to a value of 25-50%.  For front wheel drive cars, certain assumptions have been made about the suspension, and this value is disabled. 
Frontal Area, sq ft 
The frontal area is the area in square feet the vehicle's silhouette occupies when viewed from the front.  Use the formula in Fig 2.10 to estimate frontal area. Frontal areas are in the range of 5 sq ft for a motorcycle, to 20 sq ft for a small passenger car to 30 sq ft or more for a full size pick-up truck.  Also see Section 2.8.4 for calculating Frontal Area, sq ft  by clicking on the Clc button. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Drag Coefficient 
The coefficient of drag (Cd) is an engineering term used to describe how aerodynamic a vehicle's exterior design is (how easily it "slices" through the wind).  A low value for the Cd indicates the car is aerodynamic and requires little power from the engine to overcome wind resistance.  Many automotive manufacturers now publish the vehicle's Cd in advertising, since an aerodynamic car is a more fuel efficient car. An aerodynamic car is also a faster car.  If the actual Cd of a particular vehicle can not be found, use Table 2.1 to estimate the Cd for different types of vehicles  Use Table 2.2 to estimate how much Cd will change from a modification.  A more complete list is by selecting one of the examples of Body Details. 
Table 2.9: Estimate Drag Coefficient (Cd) 
Type of Vehicle or Modification  Cd  
Motorcycle  .70-1.10  
Modern Motorcycle (fairings, etc.)  .50-.70  
Pickup Truck  .50-.70  
Sedan before 1980  .45-.60  
Sports Car before 1980  .45-.55  
Open Convertible  .50-.70  
Modern Aerodynamic Sedan  .35-.45  
Modern Aerodynamic Sports Car  .30-.40  
“Best Case" vehicle  .11  

Table 2.10: Estimate How Modifications Affect Cd and Cl (lift coefficient) 
Modification  Change Cd  Change Cl (lift)  
-4 deg Angle of Attack (vs stock) *1  -.04  -100%  
+4deg Angle of Attack (vs stock)  +.04  +100%  
Open Side Windows (vs closed)  +.02  
Open T-Top & Side Windows  +.08  
4" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle) *2  -.04  -25%  
8" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle)  .00  -50%  
12" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle)  +.08  -55%  
1" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle) *3  -.03  -15%  
2" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle)  .00  -25%  
4" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle)  +.08  -35%  
Blocking half radiator air flow  -.04  -35%  

Notes concerning Table 2.1 and 2.2: 
1* Change the vehicle's attitude from the production attitude 4 degrees, where a negative angle of attack is when the front is lowered and the rear is raised. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2* For this table, an air dam is defined as a flat plate the full width of the vehicle projecting vertically down directly below front bumper (based on typical 1970s or earlier design).  Most modern designs integrate air dams for optimum Cd, therefore adding an air dam to a modern vehicle will likely show an increase in Cd but perhaps a reduction in Cl. 
3* For this table, a spoiler is defined as a flat plate extending the full width of the vehicle at the top rear edge of the rear deck (trunk) lid, angled back 20from vertical. 
• 
Cl is the lift coefficient and is listed only to give the reader an indication of the trade off between aerodynamics and lift.  Race vehicles want to minimize lift for better traction. 

• 
Table 2.2 shows typical effects from modifications.  Individual vehicle's can differ considerable. 

• 
Advertised Cds are usually the "best case". For a realistic Cd, add .03 to .05 to the advertised Cd.  


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.5 Wheels/Tires 
The Wheels/Tires Specs describe the front and rear wheels and tires on the vehicle. 

Front Wheel/Tire 
If you have specified Front Wheel Drive as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu, this section will be labeled Rear Wheel/Tire.  These wheel and tire specs are only used to estimate the inertia losses of accelerating these wheels and tires. 
Type 
Click on this combo box to select to Let Program Estimate Specs (recommended for most situations unless you are trying to estimate rolling inertia effects), Use Specs Below or Pick an Example. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Wheels & Tires Wt, lbs 
This is the weight of one wheel/tire assembly, which can be obtained by weighing the tire mounted on the wheel on a weighing (or bathroom) scale.  The program assumes there are 2 front wheels and tires on the vehicle unless you have specified Motorcycle as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu. 
Tire Diameter, inches 
The diameter of the tire is the distance from the tread across the center of the wheel to the other tread.  This is sometimes referred to as how tall the tire is.  See Tire Diameter in the Rear Wheel/Tire section below for more details. 
Rear Wheel/Tire Specs: 
If you have specified Front Wheel Drive as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu, this section will be labeled Rear Wheel/Tire. 
Wheels & Tires Wt, lbs 
This is the weight of one wheel/tire assembly, which can be obtained by weighing the tire mounted on the wheel on a weighing (or bathroom) scale.  The program assumes there are 2 front wheels and tires on the vehicle unless you have specified Motorcycle as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu. 
Tire Diameter, inches 
The diameter of the tire is the distance from the tread across the center of the wheel to the other tread.  This is sometimes referred to as how tall the tire is.  For example, for 10 x 32  inch slicks, the 32 refers to the diameter of the tire.  
This term has been changed from previous versions of Drag Racing Analyzer which used the input of Rolling Radius, or the distance from the center of the wheel to the tread on the ground.  This is approximately half of the Tire Diameter. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.12, Estimate of Tire Diameter 

Since tires can squat as they are mounted on the car or as you change air pressure, a better estimate of the diameter is to measure the distance in inches from the center of the tire to the ground, while the tire is mounted on the car.  This will give the radius,  which you can then multiply by 2 to obtain your best estimate of the tire’s diameter when  mounted on the car. 
Since Tire Diameter has a Clc button, see Section 2.8.5 for calculating Tire Diameter from other tire specs, like Rolling Radius, Circumference, or production tire sizes like P225-60-15. 
Construction 
The Construction type for the drive tire has a large effect on traction and therefore a large effect on the vehicle's maximum acceleration ability.  Click on the down arrow of this combo box to be presented with a list of choices. 
The Construction type and the following tire specs will determine the traction capability of the tires, and the amount of tire growth at high speed.  If you select anything other than Drag Slicks, the Tire Growth specs is disabled as these other types of tires do not exhibit much growth. 
Tread Width 
Is the width of the tire's contact patch on the ground.  Tread Width will only have a large effect on traction if you have specified Tire Type = Drag Slicks. 
Traction Factor 
Traction Efficiency describes how well the tires 'hook up' to the road surface.  It is affected by road surface condition (concrete vs asphalt, amount of traction compound, etc.), tire conditions (temperature, pressure, compound, etc.) and suspension setup (4 link adjustments, shocks, etc.). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Obviously this spec has a critical impact on traction for all Tire Types.  Because it depends on so many variables, it is difficult to estimate.  You can click on the Clc button to obtain a general list of estimates.  Most likely you will have to fine tune this estimate based on your vehicle's actual 60 ft times at a particular track. You can also use the Match Vehicle Performance option from the Main Menu to have the program estimate Traction Factor. 
Table 2.3 gives estimates of Traction Factor for different road surfaces.  
Tires behave quite differently on dirt or sand than concrete or asphalt, as assumed by the Drag Racing Analyzer. Therefore, it can not accurately predict acceleration performance of vehicles on dirt or sand. 
Table 2.3 Estimate of Traction Factor 
Type of Tire/Surface  Traction Factor  
Dry Concrete with Traction Compound  95-105  
Dry Concrete  80-95  
Dry Asphalt  65-85  
Wet Roads  30-50  

Tire Growth, % 
The Tire Growth specs is only used for Construction type of Drag Slicks, and is disabled for all other Construction types.  The program’s definition for Tire Growth is the percent the drive tire’s radius (distance from center of wheel to the ground) will increase at 2000 wheel RPM with no additional aerodynamic down force or lift.  Because this may be difficult to estimate, it is again suggested you use the Match Vehicle Performance option from the Main Menu to have the program estimate Tire Growth.  You can also click on Examples to load in tires with estimated tire growths given, or click on the Clc button to pick from general categories of Growth. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.6 Driving Specs 
The Driving Specs describe how the driver controls gear changes, clutch release during the launch and power through the throttle. 
After all specs are defined in this section below, a "Driving Specs Summary" section follows which describes how these options work together. 

Launch Specs 
The launch (getting the vehicle moving from its standing start) is probably the most critical element in drag racing.  The Drag Racing Analyzer gives you several options for controlling engine power and clutch release during launch. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Type 
Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to be presented with the following 3 choices: 
• 
Computer Driven-No tire spin 

• 
Use Specs Below (not available in Beginner Level, and quite difficult to work with) 

• 
Clutch-Maintain Launch RPM-No tire spin (a second “computer driven” option, available for clutches only) 


Depending on you choice of Type, some or all of the other Launch Specs will be enabled or disabled.  These types are explained below. 
Computer Driven-No tire spin 
The computer will hold the engine at full power and "feather" the clutch to put the most power to the ground, but still prevent the tires from slipping.  For transmissions with torque converters, the computer will hold the engine at full throttle and "feather" the drive axle's brakes to limit the power to the drive tires just enough to prevent tire spin.  This is similar to current production "anti-spin" traction control.  Selecting “Computer Driven-No tire spin” is the easiest way to launch the vehicle and make comparisons between vehicle modifications.  
This Type of launch may not always give the best ET.  For example, with very "sticky" tires and a clutch, the computer may release the clutch too quickly because the tires are not in danger of spinning.  This may cause engine RPM to drop too much at the line, perhaps slightly "bogging" the engine, which can actually occur with the real vehicle.  See the “Clutch-Maintain Launch RPM-No tire spin” option below. 
Use Specs Below 
The computer will drive exactly as specified by the other Launch Specs, which may allow the tires to "break loose" and spin.  This Type useful for fine tuning your particular launch strategy, or to see how much the vehicle's E.T. suffers when the tires "break loose".    
Clutch-Maintain Launch RPM-No tire spin 
This is very similar to “Computer Driven-No tire spin” in that the computer will hold the engine at full power and "feather" the clutch to put the most power to the ground, but still prevent the tires from slipping.   The difference is the computer will also not allow engine RPM to fall below Launch RPM, potentially eliminating engine bog.  This option is only available if the transmission  is using a clutch. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Launch RPM 
Is the RPM at which the engine is held at the starting line before the clutch is released.  This specification is ignored if the vehicle has a torque converter because the Converter Capacity spec and available engine torque will determine the "launch RPM" or stall RPM. 
Launch % Clutch 
Is the amount the clutch is "feathered" at the starting line at the beginning of the Launch Time.  The program then increases this amount until it is at 100% at the end of the Launch Time.  (This is a change from previous versions of Drag Racing Analyzer but seems to be more realistic.)   
Launch % Clutch specifies how much of the total clutch force is allowed to grip the clutch disc (or put another way, how far the clutch pedal is released).  For example, if the clutch is "dumped" or "side stepped" at the starting line with no feathering, this would be called 100% Launch % Clutch.  If you release the clutch until it just starts to bring the engine RPM down, and you hold it there, that could be specified as 10% Launch % Clutch. 
This specification is disabled if the vehicle has a torque converter or you are using a computer driven launch.  This spec can also be used to simulate the hydraulic or pneumatic clutch management systems on funny cars or top fuel cars. 
Launch % Throttle 
This describes how far the throttle is opened during the Launch Time. The program then increases this amount until it is at 100% at the end of the Launch Time.  (This is a change from previous versions of Drag Racing Analyzer but seems to be more realistic.)   
If the throttle is immediately opened to wide open throttle (WOT), this would be specified as 100% Launch % Throttle.  "Trans brake" vehicles where the throttle is WOT but the transmission output is locked would also use 100%. If the throttle is only opened to half throttle, this would be specified as 50% Launch % Throttle.   
This specification is used for both clutch and torque converter transmissions, but is disabled if you are using a computer driven launch which eliminates tire spin.    
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Launch Time, sec 
Is the amount of time the clutch and throttle are "feathered" at the start of the run until the Launch % Clutch and Launch % Throttle reach 100%.  In other words, this is the amount of time the Launch % Clutch and the Launch % Throttle are in effect. After this amount of time, the clutch is released completely (100%) and the throttle is opened to WOT (wide open throttle or 100%).   
This specification is disabled if you are using a computer driven launch.    
Shift Specs 
Shift Time, sec 
Is the amount of time it takes the driver to shift.  This is the total time starting from the moment the clutch is disengaged to when the clutch pedal is released after the shift.  Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to select the time and description to best match your condition. 
If the transmission has a torque converter, the program assumes this is the time required for the automatic transmission to shift.  Smooth shifting, production automatics are designed to take more shift time than race automatics. See Driving Specs Summary at the end of this section.   
Shift % Throttle 
Is the amount of throttle given the engine during the shift process, in the same manner as specified under Launch % Throttle. If the Shift % Throttle is specified as 100%, the throttle is held at WOT during the shift and the engine will rev up between shifts.  If the throttle is backed off between shifts (for example to 0% for the Shift % Throttle), the RPM will probably drop between shifts.   
This specification is disabled if the vehicle is specified with a torque converter.  The computer then assumes the throttle is held wide open (100% Shift % Throttle) during the shift.    
Shift RPMs 
Click on the down arrow key of this combo box to select to either have the program pick the shift RPMs (recommended to make program easier to use) or have the program Use Specs Below.  If you select Use Specs Below, the Shift RPMs appropriate for the # of gears in the transmission become enabled. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
1-2 Shift RPM 2-3 Shift RPM 3-4 Shift RPM 4-5 Shift RPM 5-6 Shift RPM 
These are the RPMs at which the shifts take place. For example, the 1-2 Shift RPM specifies the engine RPM in first gear when the 1-2 shift starts.  
Note: If the clutch is slipping when a shift RPM is reached, the computer will wait until both the engine and the clutch have reached the Shift RPM.  Therefore, occasionally the engine RPM in the results will be higher than the RPM specified for the shift.  
Because these specs have a Clc button, you can have the program calculate optimum shift RPMs and fill them in into these specs.  See Section 2.8.7. 
Driving Specs Summary: 
To summarize the driving specifications, the sequence of events for a run for different cases is illustrated below: 
Clutch, Launch Type: Computer Driven-No tire spin Clutch, Launch Type: Clutch-Maintain Launch RPM-No tire spin 
1. 
The engine is held at the Launch RPM. 

2. 
At the start, the throttle is opened 100% and the clutch is "feathered" to give maximum power to the tires without letting them slip.  If you selected to Maintain Launch RPM, engine RPM is not allowed to fall below Launch RPM. 

3. 
When the engine and clutch RPM both reach the 1-2 Shift RPM, the clutch is disengaged, the throttle is opened as specified by the Shift % Throttle, the gears are changed from 1st to 2nd, and when time has passed as specified by the Shift Time, the throttle is opened 100% and the clutch is again "feathered" to give maximum power to the tires without "breaking them loose". If you selected to Maintain Launch RPM, engine RPM is not allowed to fall below Minimum Launch RPM. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
4. The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run.  However, if you selected to Maintain Launch RPM, Engine RPM is allowed to fall below Launch RPM in all gears except 1st. 
Figure 2.14 Clutch, Launch Type: Use Specs Below 

Note: These graphs are available by selecting % Clutch and % Throttle as the Graph Data Types 
5. The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run.   
Notes: 
The Launch Time starts the moment the clutch is released, not when the E.T. clock starts.  For example, if the Launch Time was specified as 1.0 second and there was a .3 second rollout, the Launch Time would be over at .7 seconds on the E.T. clock. 
If the first shift takes place before the Launch Time is over, the clutch and throttle are still controlled per the Launch Specs into Gear 2 until the Launch Time has run out.    
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions Clutch, Launch Type: Use Specs Below 
1. 
The engine is held at the Launch RPM. 

2. 
At the start, the clutch is engaged as hard as specified by the Launch % Clutch and the throttle is opened as specified by the Launch % Throttle.  The % Throttle and % Clutch are gradually increased from the starting percents so they are at 100% at the end of the Launch Time. 

3. 
When the engine and clutch RPM both reach the 1-2 Shift RPM, the clutch is disengaged, the throttle is opened as specified by the Shift % Throttle, the gears are changed from 1st to 2nd, and when time has passed as specified by the Shift Time, the clutch is released 100% and the throttle is opened 100%. 

4. 
The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run.   


Notes: 
The Launch Time starts the moment the clutch is released, not when the E.T. clock starts.  For example, if the Launch Time was specified as 1.0 second and there was a .3 second rollout, the Launch Time would be over at .7 seconds on the E.T. clock. 
Figure 2.15 Clutch, Launch Type: Use Specs Below 

Note: These graphs are available by selecting % Clutch and % Throttle as the Graph Data Types 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
If the first shift takes place before the Launch Time is over, the clutch and throttle are still controlled per the Launch Specs into Gear 2 until the Launch Time has run out.    
Torque Converter, Launch Type: Computer Driven-No tire spin 
1. 
The engine is "brake torqued" at the converter's stall RPM.  Stall RPM is determined by the engine's available torque and the Converter Capacity.   

2. 
At the start, the brakes or trans brake are released and the throttle is maintained at 100%.  The drive axle's brakes are then "feathered" as necessary to limit power to the driving tires to deliver maximum power to the tires, without "breaking them loose". 

3. 
When the engine RPM reaches the 1-2 Shift  RPM, the automatic shifts to 2nd.  The engine RPM drops as much as is required for the next transmission gear.  The throttle remains open 100% during the shift and the drive axle's brakes are again "feathered" as required to put maximum power to the tires without allowing tire spin.   

4. 
The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run.   Note: This method of launching will give the best possible E.T. and MPH in most cases for the given vehicle 


description and driving specs with a torque converter. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.16 Converter, Launch Type: Computer Driven-No tire spin 


Note: These graphs are available by selecting % Clutch and % Throttle as the Graph Data Types 
Torque Converter, Launch Type: Use Specs Below 
1. 
The engine is "brake torqued" at the converter's stall RPM.  Stall RPM is determined by the engine's available torque (as limited by Launch % Throttle) and the Converter Capacity.   

2. 
At the start, the brakes are released and the throttle is opened as specified by the Launch % Throttle.  The % Throttle is gradually increased from the starting percents so it is at 100% at the end of the Launch Time. 

3. 
When the engine RPM reaches the 1-2 Shift RPM, the automatic shifts to 2nd.  The engine RPM drops as much as required for the next transmission gear.  The throttle remains open 100% during the shift.   

4. 
The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run.   


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.17 Converter, Launch Type: Use Specs Below 

Note: These graphs are available by selecting % Clutch and % Throttle as the Graph Data Types 
Notes: 
The Launch Time starts when the brakes are released, not when the E.T. clock starts.  For example, if the Launch Time was specified as 1.0 second and there was a .3 second rollout, the Launch Time would be over at .7 seconds on the E.T. clock.   
If the first shift takes place before the Launch Time is over, the throttle is still "feathered into Gear 2 until the Launch Time has run out. 
For automatic transmission shifts, the Drag Racing Analyzer uses Shift Time to define how quickly the valve body can perform shifts.  During a shift, engine RPM drops and energy is released from this drop in engine RPM.  The program increases driveshaft torque to approximately simulate recovering the engine's and converter's inertia energy.  Inertia energy is the energy released when the engine and converter spinning at a high RPM before the shift are slowed down to a lower RPM after the shift.  This inertia energy is responsible for the vehicle's "jump forward" during shifts, possible spinning the tires.  The shorter the Shift Time, the "harsher" the shift and the greater the driveshaft torque from recovering inertia energy. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.7 Calculate Performance 
2.7.1 Calculate Performance Conditions 
At the Main Menu, you can calculate performance by: 
1. 
Clicking on Calculate Performance to open the Calculate Performance Conditions menu, then clicking on Calculate Performance. 

2. 
Clicking on the Calc ET button at the top of the Main Menu. 

3. 
Pressing the <F2> key from anywhere in the Main Menu.  


If you click on Calculate Performance, you will first be presented with a menu of conditions which describe how you will "run" this vehicle.  These conditions include: 
• 
Weather and wind conditions  

• 
Total track length 

• 
How you "stage" your vehicle with respect to the "staging lights" 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Track Weather 
The weather conditions affect both the air's oxygen density which affects engine power, and the air's total density which affects aerodynamic drag.  Many drag racers use their own personal “weather stations”.  In these cases, be sure you read the Notes on Weather Conditions at the end of this section., page 52. 
Method of Recording Weather Data 
Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to be presented with this list of options: 
• 
Radio/TV Report with Rel Hum 

• 
Radio/TV Report with Dew Pt 

• 
Uncorr. Baro with Rel Hum 

• 
Uncorr. Baro with Dew Pt 

• 
Altimeter with Rel Hum 

• 
Altimeter with Dew Pt 


If you change the Method, the 4 inputs specs in the Weather section are changed or enabled/disabled as necessary to represent the new Method. In addition, all the input specs are adjusted to what they would be with the new Method.  For example, Corr. Barometer of 29.3” at an elevation of 1200 feet is converted to 28.03” Obs Barometer with Elevation disabled.  (Elevation is not important when you are using an uncorrected or observed barometer, as this type of barometer shows the actual air pressure at the track.) 
If you change from “Uncorr Baro” to Radio/TV Report with a “Corr. Baro”, the program will ask for an Elevation for the track, since this is needed to make the Barometer Correction.  All these different inputs are explained below. 
Barometric Pressure 
Corr. Barometer, ''Hg 
This input is used for either “Radio/TV Report with Rel Hum” or “Radio/TV Report with Dew Pt”.  It is the Corrected Barometric Pressure in inches of Mercury you will hear from most any TV or radio weather report. This spec is disabled if you are using an Altimeter, because the altimeter alone is measuring the air pressure.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Obs. Barometer, ''Hg 
This input is used for either “Uncorr. Baro with Rel Hum” or “Uncorr. Baro with Dew Pt”.  It is the actual or observed Barometric Pressure in inches of Mercury at the track.  These barometers measure the actual air pressure at the track, and will read approximately .1 inches of mercury less than the barometric pressure you will hear from a TV or radio weather report for each 100 feet of elevation. This spec is disabled if you are using an Altimeter, because the altimeter alone is measuring the air pressure. 
Air Temperature 
Air Temperature deg F 
Air temperature in degrees F of the air at the track.  This spec is used for all Methods of Recording Weather Data. 
Humidity 
Relative Humidity, % 
Describes the air’s humidity level in percent of humidity the air could hold at its present temperature. Relative Humidity can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from dew point and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.8.9. 
Dew Point, deg F 
The dew point in degrees F of the air at the track, which describes the air's humidity level. The Dew Point, deg F must be less than the Air Temperature.  Dew Point can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from relative humidity and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.8.8. 
Dew Point is a less confusing way of describing the air's moisture level than relative humidity.  Relative humidity readings are only meaningful if the air temperature when the reading was made is also known.  However, the air's dew point remains constant even when the air temperature changes.  For example, 40 degree air with a 80 % relative humidity has only a 10% relative humidity when the same air is heated to 100 degrees. However, the dew point remains at 36 degrees for both air temperatures. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Elevation 
Elevation, ft 
The elevation of the track above sea level in feet.  This spec is only used if you are using a Corrected Barometer, like from a TV or radio station weather report. If the elevation is below sea level, enter a negative (-) feet for this reading. 
Altimeter 
The altitude in feet above sea level from an altimeter instrument.  The program assumes the altimeter is corrected to 29.92”.  This means on a standard 29.92” barometric pressure, 60 deg day, the altimeter would read 0 feet at sea level. If the altimeter is reading feet below sea level, enter a negative (-) feet for this reading. 
Notes on Weather Readings and Weather Stations 
Many racers will use “weather stations”, a collection of temperature, humidity and barometric pressure measuring devices.  When using these instruments, here are some things to keep in mind: 
• 
Unless you are very close to sea level, an actual (observed or uncorrected) barometer will usually read less than a TV or radio weather report barometer.  For elevations less than 5000 feet, an uncorrected barometer should read approximately 0.1 “ Mercury less for each 100 feet of elevation above sea level.  For example, if your barometer instrument is at 850 feet elevation and the closest weather station reports 30.46” barometric pressure, your barometer should read approximately .85” (850/100 x .1) less, or 30.46-.85= 29.61.  It is useful to keep records of information like this (what your actual barometer reads versus what this simple calculation says it should approximately read) to see if the comparison is constantly jumping around.  If you always make the check at the same place (same elevation) like your home or shop, and the difference is varying high by .1”, than low by .2”, etc., you may want to have the barometer or altimeter checked out. 

• 
If you find that you are making many adjustments to your weather station, you are probably doing something wrong.  A barometer or altimeter which reads low, but consistently reads low is better for predicting throttle stop or dial in trends, than one you are trying to keep accurate by constantly adjusting. it. 

• 
Unless you are racing in very different air (at least 1000 ft different in dry density altitude), you are probably better off not changing jets.  Unless you know if you were on the rich side or lean side to start with, you may actually be making things worse.  Also, constant carb adjustments are just one more thing to go wrong and cause inconsistency. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Wind Specs 
Wind Speed, MPH 
The wind speed in MPH.  Wind speed has a significant effect on ET and accurate measurements are difficult to come by.  You may want to invest in a hand help anemometer or vane wind speed indicator. 

Wind Direction 
Click on this combo box to select from the following wind directions.  Also see Figure 2.19A. 
• 
Calm-No Wind 

• 
Head Wind 

• 
Tail Wind 

• 
Side Wind 

• 
Corner Head Wind 

• 
Corner Tail Wind 


Track Specs 
Track Length, ft 
Click on this combo box to select from the following track lengths: 
• 
1320 Quarter Mile 

• 
660 Eighth Mile 

• 
5280 One Mile 

• 
7040 El Mirage (1.33 mi) • 26400 Bonneville (5 mi) 


If you select 1320 ft, the program also gives the MPH reading in the summary at the top as based on the 2 lights separated by 66 ft, just as official drag strips.  You will notice this MPH is slightly less than that listed in the results at 1320 ft.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
If you enter 7040 ft (the distance of El Mirage) or 26400 ft (the distance of Bonneville) you get readings at the standard distances for timing reports at these tracks.  Also, as you increase distance, the time increments of the plots gets larger, and the results get reported at larger distance intervals.  In the History Log, the 60 ft time is replaced by 1/8 mile time for 5280 and 7040, and by 2 mile time for 26400. 
Rollout, in 
Click on this combo box to select from the following rollout distances: 
• 6" (deep) 
• 10" (medium) 
• 14" (shallow/short) 
• 0" (like data logger) 
Rollout is the distance traveled by the vehicle during the process of uncovering the lights to start the ET timer during drag racing.  This distance is generally 4-12 inches and is affected by tire size, how the vehicle is "staged", timer light positions, etc.   
Rollout, in can be measured by measuring how far your vehicle travels from the following 2 points: 
1. 
When the "staged" light first comes on, assuming that is how you "stage" your car. 

2. 
When the "staged" light goes off (or whatever else starts the ET timer) from rolling forward through the beams.  At most tracks, uncovering the "staged" light beam is what starts the ET timer. 


Although a few inches appears to be a minor detail, the rollout can affect the ET up to a couple tenths of a second. If you want data reported where the timer starts the moment the vehicle starts accelerating (like accelerometer or fifth wheel instruments), enter a rollout distance of 0. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.7.2 Calculate Performance Test Results 
The Drag Racing Analyzer's calculated output is shown in  Figure 2.19B below. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Improvement Summary 
The Improvement Summary section compares the final results of the current run with those of the previous run.  This saves you from writing down ETs and MPHs to see how much effect a given modification has on performance. 
ET (Elapsed Time in Seconds) 
Is the time from when the vehicle's front tires uncover the "staged" light beam until the front tire breaks the finish line light beam at the end of the track.  Different tracks may have different locations and calculations regarding these light beams.  These differences may have some effect on the Rollout time but should have nearly no effect on ET.   
If you have selected .001 second increments in the Preferences menu at the Main Menu, ET will be reported in thousandths of a second. 
MPH (Final Velocity in Miles per Hour) 
Is the vehicle's velocity at the end of the run in miles per hour. 
If you have selected 1320 Quarter Mile as the Track Length, the MPH will be the average velocity for the last 66 ft of the run.  This MPH closely simulates standard drag strip MPH, which is based on the time it takes the vehicle to break a light beam 66 ft before the finish line, and the finish light beam at 1320 ft.  You will notice that this MPH is somewhat less than the MPH reported at 1320 ft in the tabular results.  For any other distance, MPH is the vehicle's speed exactly as it crosses the finish line. 
Improvement 
Improvement is simply the difference between the Current Run and the Last Run for which performance was calculated. 
 If the improvement is a positive value: 
• 
The Current Run’s ET was quicker (shorter) than the Last Run’s 

• 
The Current Run’s MPH was faster (greater) than the Last Run's 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Tabular Results 
The tabular results gives important vehicle and engine information at significant points during the run: 
• 
At the start of the run. 

• 
When the Rollout distance has been traveled (when the staged light is uncovered). 

• 
At the beginning and end of each shift. 

• 
At 60, 330, 660 and 1000 ft (Some tracks also give times for these distances.) 

• 
At 60 and 100 MPH. 


Occasionally, two of these conditions may occur very close together.  For example 60 MPH may occur a couple hundredths of a second before the start of the 1-2 shift at 5000 RPM.  In these cases, you may only get one reading, either the 60 MPH point or the start of the shift at 5000 RPM. 
In these cases there may also be some slight error in reporting the results.  For example, if the 60 MPH point was reported, it may show engine RPM at 5047 for the start of the 1-2 shift, not the specified 5000 RPM. These errors produce insignificant errors in the overall MPH and ET.  These discrepancies are reduced if .001 second time in the Preferences menu . 
The following section defines each data column: 
Gear 
Is the transmission Gear # currently being used.  An “RO” indicates the “rollout” condition, where the vehicle has moved the distance defined by Rollout.. 
If data is reported during a shift, both gear numbers are given.  For example, the 60 Feet point may show a Gear of "1-2", which indicates 60 feet occurred during the 1-2 shift. 
Sec 
Shows the elapsed time since the Rollout distance was traveled.  If Rollout is specified as 0, this column shows the time since the vehicle first started to accelerate.  Negative values of Sec shows these conditions occurred before the Rollout distance was traveled.  For example, if the first Sec value is -.22 and the second value is 0 (Gear = RO), it says the vehicle started the acceleration .22 seconds before the rollout condition was met, which starts the ET timer. 
 If you want the timer to start the instant the vehicle starts to accelerate (not like a drag strip ET timer), select Rollout of 0 (like data logger). 
The resolution of the time column can be increased to thousandths of a second by selecting .001 second increments in the Preferences menu 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
MPH 
Is the vehicle's velocity in MPH. 
Accel Gs 
Is the vehicle's acceleration in Gs.  If the tires are spinning, the G value is followed by an S. 
Feet 
Is the distance the vehicle has traveled during the run, measured in feet. 
C RPM 
Is the clutch or converter output RPM.  See EngRPM. 
EngRPM 
Is the engine RPM.  The difference between CRPM and EngRPM is the amount the clutch or converter is slipping.  If the clutch is not slipping, CRPM will be equal to EngRPM. 
TqMult 
The amount of torque multiplication which is produced in the torque converter or clutch.  A value of 1.5 indicates that the output of the torque converter is 1.5 times as large as the torque which entered it.  If the engine can output 300 ft-lbs, the torque converter will increase it to 450 ft-lbs.  See torque converter explanation in the Assumptions, Appendix 1. 
If the vehicle is equipped with a clutch, this value is 1. 
C Slip 
Is the amount of clutch or converter slip occurring, in percent. 
T Slip 
Is the amount of slip in the tires, in percent.  All tires show some slip during acceleration, even if they do not “break loose”.  If the tires are slipping excessively (“broken loose”), T Slip% is shown as 100% and an “S” appears in the Accel Gs column. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
% Thrt 
Is the percent of the engine’s HP being allowed to be delivered to the clutch or converter.  This will be reduced from 100% to prevent tire spin, as directed by the Launch % Throttle, or as directed by the Shift % Throttle. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8 Calculation Menus: 
The following section explains the user input for engine specs listed with Clc buttons.  These specs are ones where you can simply enter a value, or click on the Clc button and the program will present a menu of inputs which will calculate that particular parameter.  These menus are like computer “scratch pads” for calculating specs like Final Drive Ratio, Tire Diameter, etc. from other inputs. 
Notes: 
The starting values in each calculation menu are usually blanked out when the menu is opened. If there is other information in the program to estimate what one of your input values will be, it may be loaded.  As shown in Figure 2.20, Vehicle Weight, Engine Cubic Inches and RPM at HP Peak are already available from other menus in the program, and these values are loaded into the Calculation Menu. You are free to change them to any other value. 
Once enough specs have been entered, the calculated value(s) at the top of the menu will be displayed.  This calculated value(s) will now be updated each time you change a spec.  If you want to use this calculated value, click on Use Calc Value. If the calculated value is within expected limits, it will be loaded into the original menu.  If you click on Cancel, you will be returned to the original menu with the original value unchanged.  If you click on Help, you will be given a general explanation of calculation menus, and a page # in this section for more info about the particular menu you are using. 
The input values or calculated values in any calculation menu have NO affect on calculated performance unless you load the Calculated value into the original menu. If you already know a spec in the form required by the program, then you have no need to use the calculation menu.  For example, if you know the engine makes 420 ft lbs at 4500 and 450 HP at 6000 RPM, then, you have no need to use a calculation menu to calculate Peak Tq and Peak HP. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Example 
Assume you want to calculate Peak Torque and Peak Horsepower for your car, but you know very little about the engine.  You could click on one of the Clc buttons by Peak Torque or Peak Horsepower in the Engine Specs menu.  You will be presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.20. 
Vehicle Weight, Engine Cubic Inches and RPM at HP Peak are already available from other menus in the program, and these values are already loaded into the Calculation Menu.  Vehicle Weight and Cubic Inches are accurate for your engine and vehicle so you leave them “as is”.  However, RPM at HP Peak you are not sure of and you may change this. 
Note that all inputs are disabled except Type of Calc.  Select the Type of Calc from this Combo box.  Since you do know your quarter mile MPH, select Quarter Mile MPH. 
All specs except Vol Eff are now enabled (printed in black, not gray). All you have to do is enter your Quarter Mile MPH of 121 and press <Enter>.  You now see the calculated Peak HP, Peak Torque and Peak Torque RPM at the top of the menu. 
You would be ready to Use Calc Values if the RPM at Peak HP was correct.  From reading in this section, you see that a good estimate of RPM at Peak HP is about 500 RPM less than the RPM you shift at or go through the traps at.  So you decide to adjust that up to 5500 RPM.  You see Peak HP stay the same but Peak Torque and Peak Torque RPM updated to new, more accurate readings. 
If you click on Cancel, you will return to the Engine Specs menu with the Power Curve specs unchanged. If you click on Use Calc Value, you will be returned to the Engine Specs menu with the Calculated Peak HP, Peak Torque, Peak HP RPM and Peak Torque RPM filled in. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.1 Calc Power Curve 
This calculation is available from the Engine specs menu and lets you estimate a set of engine Power Curve specs.  Initiate this calculation by entering a Clc button for any engine Power Curve spec or the 

Peak HP Peak Torque, ft lbs Peak Torque RPM 
Are the values calculate from these inputs.   
If you select Quarter Mile or Eighth Mile MPH as the Type of Calc, Peak HP is calculated from a simple equation relating only vehicle weight and finish MPH to available HP.  Note that these Engine Power Curve specs may not give the same performance (quarter mile or eighth mile MPH) when coupled with your particular vehicle specifications. 
If you select CID and Vol Eff, the Peak HP value is calculated using the following assumptions: 
• 
85% mechanical efficiency at RPM at HP Peak 

• 
35% thermal efficiency 

• 
Gasoline as the fuel with an energy content of 19,000 BTU/lb 

• 
Dry air density of .0764 lbs/cu ft 


The other Power Curve specs are derived from Peak HP and RPM at HP Peak and an assumed shape of the torque curve based on the Cubic Inches. The RPM at HP Peak input at the bottom of the menu is always loaded back into the Engine specs menu. 
These calculations are based on power corrected to the standard aftermarket dyno correction factor of 29.92” mercury and 60 degrees dry air.  Therefore, anytime you use values from this menu, the Corr Factor in the Engine menu will be set to Std Dyno (29.92 and 60 deg) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Type of Calc 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Quarter Mile MPH 

• 
Eighth Mile MPH 

• 
CID and Vol Eff 


Depending on your choice certain inputs will now be enabled. 
Vehicle Weight, lbs 
Is the vehicle's total weight including driver, in pounds.  This is initially set to the Vehicle Weight in the Body & Axle menu, but can be changed to anything you want. 
Quarter Mile MPH Eighth Mile MPH 
Is the vehicle's top speed in a standing start, quarter mile or eighth mile acceleration. 
Engine Cubic Inches 
Is the engine’s size in Cubic Inches. This is initially set to the Displacement in the Engine menu, but can be changed to anything you want. 
Vol Eff 
Is the engine's volumetric efficiency at the HP peak.  Volumetric efficiency means what is the amount of air which this engine pulls in one cycle compared to how much it could under “ideal” conditions.  Generally this is less than 100%, but can be up to 130% for highly tuned race engines, or up to 300% on supercharged or turbocharged engines. Generally, this is not the engine's peak volumetric efficiency (which usually occurs at the torque peak) but is close to it. 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box to select from the following choices: 
• 
65 Bad Production 

• 
75 Typ Production 

• 
80 Good Production 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
• 
85 HiPerf Production 

• 
90  Poor Street/Strip 

• 
95  Typ Street/Strip 

• 
100 Good Street/Strip 

• 
110 Good Race Engine 

• 
115 Very Good Race Engine 

• 
120 Excellent Race Engine • 125 Pro Stock/Formula 1 

• 
90 Prod, 5 PSI Boost 

• 
100 Prod, 10 PSI Boost 

• 
110 Prod, 15 PSI Boost 

• 
120 Prod, 20 PSI Boost 

• 
95 HiPrf Prod, 5 PSI Boost 

• 
110 HiPrf Prod, 10 PSI Boost 

• 
125 HiPrf Prod, 15 PSI Boost 

• 
135 HiPrf Prod, 20 PSI Boost 

• 
105 Strt/Strp, 5 PSI Boost 

• 
120 Strt/Strp, 10 PSI Boost 

• 
135 Strt/Strp, 15 PSI Boost 

• 
145 Strt/Strp, 20 PSI Boost 

• 
115 Good Race, 5 PSI Boost 

• 
130 Good Race, 10 PSI Boost 

• 
145 Good Race, 15 PSI Boost 

• 
160 Good Race, 20 PSI Boost 

• 
140 Exc Race, 10 PSI Boost 

• 
170 Exc Race, 20 PSI Boost 

• 
200 Exc Race, 30 PSI Boost 

• 
225 Exc Race, 40 PSI Boost 

• 
250 Exc Race, 50 PSI Boost 

• 
270 Exc Race, 60 PSI Boost 

• 
285 Exc Race, 70 PSI Boost 

• 
300 Exc Race, 80 PSI Boost 


RPM at HP Peak 
Is the RPM at which the HP peak occurs. This is initially set to the RPM at HP Peak in the Engine menu, but can be changed to anything you want.   
Note:  Most any modification which increases HP (other than nitrous oxide or super/turbocharging) will also increase RPM at HP Peak.  If you have no information about your RPM at HP Peak, use an RPM 500 RPM lower than your shift RPM.  This  RPM input is always loaded back into the Engine specs menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.2 Calc Final Drive Ratio 
This menu is available by clicking on the Final Drive Ratio Clc button in the Body & Axle specs menu. 
Type 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Ring & Pinion Gear Only (typical of most rear wheel drive rear axles) 

• 
Chain Drive Only (typical of go carts, most motorcycles, etc.) 

• 
Gear Reduction & Chain Drive (typical of motorcycles where there is a chain reduction between the engine and the transmission, and then there is the chain ratio between the transmission and rear axle) 


Depending on your choice certain inputs will now be enabled. 

# Teeth, Pinion Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the smaller pinion gear (or drive gear which attaches to the driveshaft) in the rear axle. If you selected Gear Reduction & Chain Drive as the Type, this is the # teeth on the sprocket or drive gear on the engine’s crankshaft.  In almost all cases, this number will be smaller than # Teeth Ring Gear. 
# Teeth, Ring Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the larger ring gear (or driven gear which attaches to the axle shafts through the differential) in the rear axle. If you selected Gear Reduction & Chain Drive as the Type, this is the # teeth on the sprocket or drive gear on the transmission input shaft or clutch shaft.  In almost all cases, this number will be larger than # Teeth Pinion Gear. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
# Teeth, Drive Sprocket 
This is the number of teeth on the smaller drive sprocket on the engine or transmission for chain drive systems.  In almost all cases, this number will be smaller than # Teeth Wheel Sprocket. 
# Teeth, Wheel Sprocket 
This is the number of teeth on the larger driven sprocket on the wheel or axle for chain drive systems. In almost all cases, this number will be larger than # Teeth Drive Sprocket. 
2.8.3 Calc % Wt on Rear Tires 
This calculation is available from the Body & Axle Specs menu and allows you to calculate a vehicle's weight distribution. 
Total Vehicle Weight, lbs 
Is the total vehicle weight with driver as measured on a scale.  This initially set to the Vehicle Weight in the Body and Axle specs menu, but can be changed to anything. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Weight on 1 Axle 
Is the weight recorded on the scale with the driver when only one axle's tires are on the scale, either front or rear tires. 
Which Axle? 
Click on the combo box to choose either Rear or Front, to identify which axle was on the scale for the Weight on 1 Axle measurement. 
2.8.4 Calc Frontal Area 
This calculation is available from the Body & Axle Specs menu and allows you to estimate a vehicle's frontal area. 
Track Width, inches 
Is the distance from the center of one front tire to the center of the other front tire.  This value is initially set to the Rear Track Width in the Body and Axle specs menu, but can be changed to most anything you want. 
Roof Height, inches 
The distance in inches from the ground to highest portion of the roof or vehicle in inches which extends nearly the full width of the vehicle.   
For example, for a truck with a roll bar behind the cab, measure to the top of the roll bar, but not to the top of one of the spot lights mounted on the bar.  However, if so many lights are mounted on the bar that 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
they are nearly continuous for the full width of the vehicle, it may be more accurate to then measure to the top of the spot lights. 

2.8.5 Tire Diameter Tread Width 
This calculation is available from the Wheel & Tire Specs menu and allows you to estimate either a front or rear wheel’s Tire Diameter and Tread Width for certain Tire Rating Types. 
Note:  For all Rating Types except Rolling Radius, the Calc Tire Diameter is approximately 3% less than what you would calculate based on the exact dimensions.  This is to allow for some tire wear, deformation, and slip. 
Rating Type 
Click on this combo box for the following rating types: 
• 
P-Metric (ex P225-60-15) 

• 
Letter (ex G-60-15) 

• 
Rolling Radius, inches 

• 
Circumference, inches 


Depending on your choice, certain specs will become enabled.  If you choose the P-Metric or Letter Type, you will also be able to calculate the Tread Width. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Metric Tire Size (ex 225) 

Identifies the tire's cross sectional width in millimeters and is also related to the tire's load carrying capacity. 
Letter Tire Size 
Identifies the tire's load carrying capacity.  Click on this combo box to select on of the letters.  This is an older rating system and there is more variation across manufacturer's. 
Aspect Ratio 
Is the ratio of tire cross sectional height to cross sectional width.  A 75 series tire has a height 75% as high as its cross sectional width, and is generally a tall tire.  A 50 series tire is a lower profile tire, more suited to cornering and performance. 
Figure 2.26 Rolling Radius 
Wheel Rim Diameter 
Is the diameter of the wheel's rim. 
Rolling Radius, in 
Is the tire's radius, measured with the tire mounted on the car, with the tire 

on the ground with typical vehicle weight on  it.  Radius is the distance from the center of the tire to the ground.  See Figure 2.26  Note that this is the only calculation where the diameter is not reduced by 3%, because the load is already deforming the tire.  This is usually the most accurate way to Calculate the Tire Diameter. 
Circumference, in 
Is the tire's circumference measured in inches.  Circumference is the distance around the outside of the tire on the tread. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.6 Estimated Traction Factors 

menu.  Click on the combo box to be presented with the following choices: 
• 
110 Best Possible Suspension Setup & Track 

• 
100 Best Drag Strip with Traction Compound 

• 
95 Good Drag Strip with Traction Compound 

• 
90 Tire on Good Concrete 

• 
85 Tire on Average Concrete 

• 
80 Tire on Good Asphalt 

• 
75 Tire on Average Asphalt 


This menu is different than other Calculation menus in that there is not calculation performed, but you are simply picking a Traction Factor from a list of descriptions.  
The Traction Factors in this list are very general.  You will probably have to fine tune this spec based on your vehicle's actual 60 ft times.  The program can also determine Traction Factor with the Match Vehicle Performance command at the Main Menu. 
2.8.7 Calculated Shift RPMs 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Shift RPMs Clc button  in the Driving Specs menu.  There are no inputs to this menu.  You are simply telling the program to calculate what it would use for Shift RPMs.  As Figure 
2.28 shows, you can then choose to use (load in) these Calculated Shift RPMs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.8 Calc Dew Point, deg F 
Depending on your choice of Method of Recording Weather Data, you will be entering either Dew Point 
or Relative Humidity in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu or in the Throttle Stop or Dial In menus.  These humidity inputs at all these menus have a Clc button.  This is the Calculation Menu you will get if you are using Dew Point. 
Know Relative Humidity? 
If you know the relative humidity of the air and the air temperature, select Yes.  Otherwise select No to input Wet and Dry bulb temperatures from a psychrometer.  Depending on your choice the appropriate inputs are enabled. 

Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the relative humidity measurement was made.  For example, if the weather service or weather report gives a relative humidity of 56 % and a temperature of 68 degrees, use 68 degrees. 
Outside Rel Humidity, % 
Is the air's relative humidity as reported by a weather service or measured by humidity instruments. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken.  The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Wet Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  Relative humidity or dew point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart.  The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. 
2.8.9 Relative Humidity, % 
Depending on your choice of Method of Recording Weather Data, you will be entering either Dew Point or Relative Humidity in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu or in the Throttle Stop or Dial In menus.  These humidity inputs at all these menus have a Clc button.  This is the Calculation Menu you will get if you are using Relative Humidity.      
Know Dew Point? 
If you know the dew point of the air and the air temperature, select Yes. Otherwise select No to input Wet and Dry bulb temperatures from a psychrometer.  Depending on your choice the appropriate inputs are enabled. 

Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the Dew Point measurement was made. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Dew Point, deg F 
Is the air's Dew Point in degrees F as reported by a weather service or measured by humidity instruments. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken.  The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp. 
Wet Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  Relative humidity or dew point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart.  The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9 Match Vehicle Performance 
The Drag Racing Analyzer will automatically 'fine tune' certain critical specs to match a particular vehicle's performance.  See Example 4.2.  The Match Vehicle Performance process consists of: 
1. 
You set all specs to match the vehicle you are building as close as practical.  This is very important for accurate results. 

2. 
Click on the Match Veh Perf button at the top of the Main Menu to bring up the Match Vehicle Performance menu shown in Figure 2.31.  

3. 
Fill in the Match Vehicle Performance menu with the vehicle's performance.  Then click on OK (adjust veh. specs to match performance) to start the process. 

4. 
The program will adjust: 


• 
Engine Power Curve 

• 
Torque Converter Capacity or will switch the clutch specs to “Let Program Estimate Clutch 

Specs” if the clutch is too small for the Engine Power Curve. 

• 
Tire Traction Factor 

• 
Tire Construction, if it needs more traction than 110% Traction Factor can provide 

• 
Tire Growth 

• 
Tire Diameter To find a combination giving the closest match to the vehicle's performance.   


If the program can not arrive at acceptable specs in 100 passes down the track, it will give you a notice.  You may then want to double check your entries in the Match Veh Perf menu or some of the other specs in the other menus. 
If the program does arrive at acceptable specs, you will be shown a summary of the new specs the program found and how close the program matched performance, as shown in Figure 2.32. You can then load these specs into the menus for this vehicle. 
This process can save a good deal of "cut and try" on your part to get your vehicle 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
specs adjusted. Example 4.2 shows the Match Vehicle Performance process in more detail. 
Distance of Race 
Select either Quarter or Eighth mile for the distance of the race you are trying to match. 
Stall RPM at Launch 
Enter the converter's stall RPM during the launch.  Stall RPM is the highest RPM you see on the tach or data logger with the throttle wide open but the back tires not turning.  This occurs with the trans brake 
ON, or before the car has had a chance to move off the line.   
This spec is not enabled if the Transmission Specs indicate a clutch is being used. 
60 foot time 
The vehicle's 60 ft time from the track's timer. 
Finish MPH 
The vehicle's MPH at the end of the run (either eighth or quarter mile).  This is sometimes called "trap speed" or speed through the "traps". 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Finish Engine RPM 
The engine's RPM at the end of the run, or at the same time when Finish MPH is recorded.  If you are not sure of this RPM, or you do not want the Tire Diameter adjusted, leave this spec blank or set it to zero. 
Finish Trans Gear # 
The transmission gear at the end of the run, or at the same time when Finish MPH is recorded. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.10 Throttle Stop Prediction 
A throttle stop is a throttle activator which closes the throttle a certain amount for a programmed amount of time a programmed amount of time after the clutch switch or trans brake switch is activated at the start of the run. Many Super Class racers use throttle stops to control their car’s performance to run their index ET. Couple all the settings available for the throttle stop and weather and wind variations, consistently running the Index ET is complicated.  See Example 4.4. 
The Drag Racing Analyzer’s Throttle Stop Prediction screen will help you decide how to adjust your throttle stop timer for winning consistency.  Click on the Throttle Stop button at the top of the Main Menu and you are presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.33.  This menu will let you predict the throttle stop setting (usually the time the stop is ON or the throttles are closed) required to produce some desired ET (usually the Index) based on 2 previous runs with different throttle stop settings.  Important points for accuracy include: 
• 
It is important for accuracy that most all the other vehicle specs accurately match your vehicle before you use the 'Throttle Stop' option.  This means that if you Calculate Performance for these specs, you will get an ET within about .3 seconds and a MPH within about 2 MPH of what your car runs with No throttle stop. 

• 
These 2 throttle stop settings should be significantly different, ideally 1 producing a faster ET and 1 producing a slower ET than your desired ET.   

• 
The prediction can still work even though both ETs are faster or slower than your desired ET, as long as there is significant difference (at least .3 seconds or more) in the 2 ETs which is not caused simply by the weather change.   

• 
The accuracy of the predicted Throttle Stop also depends on the Time Resolution setting in the Preferences menu available at the Main Menu (.001 seconds gives better accuracy). 

• 
All 3 runs should use the same weather instruments for all measurements (without calibration or adjustment in between). 

• 
Although you may not want to change your strategy, predictions are best if the throttle stop comes on after the 60 foot timing lights. 


In this menu you can enter: 
• 
Your vehicle's actual 60 ft time and ET for 2 previous runs. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions which produced these results. 

• 
Your vehicle's throttle stop setting for these 2 runs. 

• 
Your desired ET for the third run or Index to Run. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions for the third run where you want to run the Index. 

• 
Optional:  Your prediction of the 60 foot time for the Predicted run. 


When all these have been entered, click on 'Update Throttle Stop' or the Clc button by Throttle Stop.  The program will make 3 passes simulating the 2 runs you have already made and the 3rd run you want to predict. Based on these results, the program will calculate the throttle stop setting to produce the desired ET for the third run or 'Index to Run'. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.33 Throttle Stop Menu 
Weather conditions for Weather and ET for 2 previous runs with 
Throttle Stop prediction significant difference in throttle stop settings. 
to run the Index ET. 
Menu bar of commands to Current Vehicle file.
open or save a file of Throttle This must be the vehicleStop specs, copy specs from these Throttle Stop1 run to another, update the Specs are for.
prediction, etc. 
Comments you can enter to describe data. These are useful reminders when you open a saved Throttle Stop 
The Throttle Stop
File. setting the program
Type of weather instruments you are using. recommends to run the Index.
Index ET or the ET you want to run plus any safety margin. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
This menu is almost like a separate program, because you can enter comments in the lower left corner to describe what these specs represent. You can then Save these specs by clicking on File in the Menu Bar, then Save or Save As.  Save As lets you save these specs under a new name, where Save simply updates the current name with any changes.  
By saving sets of specs, you can predict throttle stops in the future when you do not have results from 2 previous runs. Simply click on File, then Open, and pick a Throttle Stop file with weather conditions or track conditions fairly similar to those you will be running.  Again, be sure the current vehicle specs match your vehicle you are running. 
IMPORTANT: This method of using a past, saved Throttle Stop file is not nearly as accurate as using previous runs from the same track, same day and same weather instruments. 
See Section 3.3 for how  to Open or Save vehicle files.  Saving or Opening Throttle Stop files work much the same way. 
There are 2 general sets of commands which let you copy sets of data from 1 run to another.  These are: 
• 
The Edit command where you can Copy or Clear various runs. 

• 
The Advance command where you move runs from right to left, as you would when your Predicted run now becomes your Previous Run #2 on which you will predict a new run. 


Remember, Previous Run #1 and the new Previous Run #2 should have at least .3 seconds difference in ET. 
2.10.2 Definition of Inputs 
Weather Inputs 
Corr. Barometer, ''Hg Obs. Barometer, ''Hg 
Air Temperature deg F 
Relative Humidity, % Dew Point, deg F 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Elevation, ft Altimeter 
Method of Recording Weather Data 
These are all explained in Section 2.7.1, starting on page 50.  All 3 runs must use the same Method of Recording Weather Data.  That is because the same weather instruments should be used for all measurements for the best accuracy. 
Throttle Stop (Previous Runs) 
Is the throttle stop setting (usually the time the throttle stop is on, or is closing the throttles) in seconds.  This is the adjustment you usually have the greatest control over and which gives the best consistency. 
60 foot, sec (Previous Runs) 
Is the 60 foot times for the previous runs. 
ET, sec 
Is the ET you obtained for the 2 previous runs with the different throttle stop settings.  It is best if one of these runs is faster and one is slower than the Index, and the difference in ET is at least .3 seconds.   
Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time 
Click on this combo box for 2 choices: 
• 
Let Program Estimate 60 ft time 

• 
You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below 


If you let the program estimate the 60 ft time, it will assume nearly the same traction as Previous Run #2. If you want to enter your prediction of 60 ft time, based on lane choice, traction change through the day, etc., select You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below.  Then the 60 foot, sec input will be enabled where you can enter your own estimate. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
60 foot, sec (Predicted Run) 
Is your estimate of the 60 foot time for the Predicted Run.  See Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time above. 
Index, sec 
Is the Index, or your desired ET.  In the Super Classes there are usually 8.90, 9.90 or 10.90 seconds.  You may want to build in your own safety factor, one which may change depending on the situation.  Say if you feel confident of a win (novice opponent), you may want to enter 9.92, for a 20 thousandths second safety margin, be sure you don’t break out.  We recommend you always use some safety margin, at least .005 seconds. 
T/S Start Time 
In this version, this time is only used to ensure the 60 foot times are not being affected by the throttle stop.  If the program thinks the throttle stop is On before the 60 foot time, 60 foot times are not used in the prediction. 
Throttle Stop (Predicted Run) 
This is the program’s prediction of your throttle stop setting to run the Index ET.  If this is blank, click on the Clc button by it or Update Prediction in the menu bar at the top of the menu.  The Throttle Stop is not saved, because its value will change depending on what the other vehicle specs in the program are set to. 
Check Appendix 3 for new Throttle Stop options added to v3.2. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
2.11 Dial In Prediction 
The Dial In Prediction menu will let you predict the ET of a future run based on a past run and the weather conditions of the past run and the future run.  This is very useful for predicting 'Dial In' for bracket racing. 
Click on the Dial In button at the top of the Main Menu and you are presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.34.  This menu will let you predict the ET of a future Predicted Run with different weather, wind, and possibly traction conditions based on 1 previous run.  Important points for accuracy include: 
• 
It is important for accuracy that most all the other vehicle specs accurately match your vehicle before you use the 'Dial In' option. This means that if you Calculate Performance for these specs, you will get an ET within about .3 seconds and a MPH within about 2 MPH of what your car actually runs. 

• 
The accuracy of the predicted Dial In also depends on the Time Resolution setting in the Preferences menu available at the Main Menu (.001 seconds gives better accuracy and Dial In prediction to the nearest .001 seconds). 

• 
Both runs should use the same weather instruments for all measurements (without calibration or adjustment in between). 


In this menu you can enter: 
• 
Your vehicle's actual 60 ft time and ET for the Previous run. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions which produced these results for the Previous run. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions for the future Predicted run. 

• 
Optional:  Your prediction of the 60 foot time for the Predicted run. 


When all these have been entered, click on 'Update Dial In' or the Clc button by Dial In.  The program will make 2 passes simulating the Previous run you have already made and the future run you want to predict.  Based on these results, the program will calculate expected ET or Dial In setting.  You may want to add a safety margin to this, say .010 seconds or so, to prevent breaking out (running faster than your Dial In. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 2.34 Dial In Menu 
Weather conditions for Weather and ET for previous run. 
Dial In prediction to run 
the Index ET. Menu bar of commands to open or save a file of Dial In 
Current Vehicle file.
specs, copy specs from 1 This must be the vehiclerun to another, update the these Dial In Specs areprediction, etc. 
for. 
Comments you can enter to 
The Dial In the program
describe data. These are useful reminders when you recommends (the ET the open a saved Dial In File. program expects you to 
run). Remember to subtract off any safety
Type of weather instruments you are using. margin you may need for your actual Dial In to run. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
This menu is almost like a separate program, because you can enter comments in the lower left corner to describe what these specs represent. You can then Save these specs by clicking on File in the Menu Bar, then Save or Save As.  Save As lets you save these specs under a new name, where Save simply updates the current name with any changes.  
By saving sets of specs, you can predict Dial Ins in the future when you do not have results from a previous run.  Simply click on File, then Open, and pick a Dial In file with weather conditions or track conditions fairly similar to those you will be running.  Again, be sure the current vehicle specs match the vehicle you are running. 
IMPORTANT:  This method of using a past, saved Dial In file is not nearly as accurate as using the previous run from the same track, same day and same weather instruments. 
See Section 3.3 for how  to Open or Save vehicle files.  Saving or Opening Dial In files work much the same way. 
There are 2 general sets of commands which let you copy sets of data from 1 run to another.  These are: 
• 
The Edit command where you can Copy or Clear various runs. 

• 
The Advance command where you move runs from right to left, as you would when your Predicted run now becomes your Previous Run  on which you will predict a new run. 


2.11.2 Definition of Inputs 
Weather Inputs 
Corr. Barometer, ''Hg Obs. Barometer, ''Hg 
Air Temperature deg F 
Relative Humidity, % Dew Point, deg F 
Elevation, ft Altimeter 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Method of Recording Weather Data 
These are all explained in Section 2.7.1, starting on page 50.  All 3 runs must use the same Method of Recording Weather Data.  That is because the same exact instruments should be used for all measurements for the best accuracy. 
60 foot, sec (Previous Runs) 
Is the 60 foot times for the previous run for your car at the track. 
ET, sec 
Is the ET you obtained for the previous run for your car at the track. 
Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time 
Click on this combo box for 2 choices: 
• 
Let Program Estimate 60 ft time 

• 
You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below 


If you let the program estimate the 60 ft time, it will assume nearly the same traction as the Previous Run. If you want to enter your prediction of 60 ft time, based on lane choice, traction change through the day, etc., select You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below.  Then the 60 foot, sec input will be enabled where you can enter your own estimate. 
60 foot, sec (Predicted Run) 
Is your estimate of the 60 foot time for the Predicted Run.  See Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time above. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Dial In (Predicted Run) 
This is the program’s prediction of your Dial In setting to run the Index ET.  If this is blank, click on the Clc button by it or Update Prediction in the menu bar at the top of the menu.  The Dial In is not saved, because its value will change depending on what the other vehicle specs in the program are set to. 
You will have decide if you want to use this predicted Dial In “as is” or subtract off a safety factor of say .010-.020 seconds or so.  The more you subtract off the Dial In, the less likely you are to “break out” (run faster than your Dial In and be disqualified).  For example, if you are up against a novice opponent and the program is predicting a 9.655 Dial In, you may want to use a 9.635 (9.655-.020) Dial In.  This gives you a .020 second cushion or safety margin to prevent “breaking out”. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
2.12 Examples 
Many of the specs which the Drag Racing Analyzer uses to predict performance are difficult for some users to get. For that reason, the program comes with sets of Example specs which the user can load in automatically and easily. 
Figure 2.35 Using Component Examples 
If you are curretly using a set of Example specs, the name of the Example will appear here. You can also click on this combo box to pick a new example or switch the Type to Use Specs Below. 


a list of example specs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
At the top of most component sections of the Drag Racing Analyzer’s menus, you will find a description of the “Type” of component used.  In Figure 2.35 the component section is the Body Details in the Body & Axle menu.  This combo box can 2 or 3 choices: 
• 
Use Specs Below 

• 
Pick An Example 

• 
Ex Body: 65-68 Mustang Big Block (or some other name of a specific example) 


Figure 2.35 shows that the current Body Details specs are those picked from the Drag Racing Analyzer’s Example specs for a 65-68 Big Block Mustang.  This name can be a handy reminder of the type of vehicle you are simulating, and also where you got these specs.   
There are 2 general ways to pick an example component.  You can either select the Pick An Example from the Type combo box or click on the Get Example button at the bottom of the menu.  You may be first presented with a list of general categories of component examples, like shown in Figure 2.36.  (This screen would not appear for picking Body Details because there is no other component examples available at this menu.) 
Eventually you will obtain a list of examples, like shown in Figure 2.37.  Here you can select your choice by either clicking on it, then clicking on the Pick button, or double clicking on it.  (By single clicking on an example you have saved (not one 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
provided by Performance Trends) you can click on Delete to delete it.)   
Next you will be shown a comparison of the example you chose and the current specs, as shown in Figure 2.38.  Click on Back to return to Figure 2.37.  Click on Load In These Example Specs to use these specs. You will then be given a notice about how these specs can not describe all details of the example just chosen, and you should still use your own judgment about the results.  See Figure 2.39. 
You have the option of changing the Example specs.  For example, lets say you have lowered your 

Mustang.  You calculate the new Frontal Area is only 18 square feet.  You can click on Frontal Area and 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
type in 18 and press <Enter>.  The program will warn you that by changing this spec, the name of the example will no longer be for a Mustang, but will be changed to the general “Use Specs Below”. 
You also have the example of saving your own sets of specs to the list of Component Examples.  If the current specs are not an example, click on the Save Example button to be presented with the screen of Figure 2.40.  Select Save and these specs will be saved to the example list with the name you entered. 

Notes: 
• 
Not all specs have Examples available and some Example categories have very few examples from which to choose.  These features will expand with later updates. 

• 
The specs in these Examples are approximate.  Different pieces of hardware and later designs may have different specs, producing very different results.  You will be more accurate if you use your own figures from your own tests, or the latest information from the manufacturer. 

• 
No checks are made to see if your combination of Examples is physically possible.  You can choose to put Ford 'Toploader' transmission gear ratios behind a 5 HP Briggs & Stratton engine in a Prod 82 Corvette body type.  This may be an interesting "what if", but you must realize this hardware will NOT bolt together. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Chapter 3 Output 
The Drag Racing Analyzer provides several ways to view and output the test results, including: 
• 
Tabular, calculated Test Results displayed on the screen.  Check Section 2.7 for definitions of Test Results. 

• 
Analysis Report giving tips, warning of safety issues, etc. 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output or reports or graphs 

• 
Vehicle Library for recording sets of vehicle specs for later use 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.2 Additional Output Options Click here or here to graph these results 


Click here to return to the Main Menu 
Click here to view and/or edit the Vehicle Comments 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.1 Analysis Reports 
When calculated test results are displayed on the screen, you can obtain an Analysis Report by clicking on Analyze in the menu bar.  The Analysis report consists of 1-3 pages of suggestions for improving performance, safety warnings, etc. concerning the performance results calculated. See Figure 3.3 and 3.4 for examples. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
IMPORTANT: The Drag Racing Analyzer  can NOT anticipate all UNSAFE and poor performing situations. Do NOT rely only on the Analysis report to point out problems and SAFETY HAZARDS.  You must use your own judgment, expert advice from experienced engine builders and the manufacturer of the components. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.2 Graphs
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph button or the Graph menu command in the Test Results screen shown in Figure 3.2.  Graphs can be of 7 types of data and may include a baseline graph of some previous run, depending on the settings of certain Options. 



Menu item brings up on screen help. 
Engine RPM data type 
shown with Baseline 
Graph Title (can be changed in Options menu) 
Graph Labels (can be changed in Options menu) 
Figure 3.5 Graph Screen Menu item to return to Test Results screen. Menu item to print graph. Window setup and print options and print button available by clidking on Options. Menu item to brint up Options menu shown on next page. Quick selection of types of data to graph, which is also available at the Options menu. 
Appendix 5, page 169, New Features in v3.4 B discusses new Graphing features. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
A typical graph is shown on the previous page with some explanation of features.  The next pages show the Graph Options window and discusses these options. 

Graph Labels 
Use Standard Labels Use Labels Given Here 
Select “Use Standard Labels” for the program to put its standard labels on the graph.  Select “Use Labels Given Here” for the program to use the labels you can enter or change in this section of the Graph Options window. 
Current Run’s Label Baseline Run’s Label Plot Title 
Click on these 3 text boxes to enter or change the labels or the graph title.  You must select “Use Labels Given Here” before you can enter or change any of these specs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Print 
Black and White Color 
Select either “Black and White” or “Color” to tell the program how to print the graph.  Unless you have a color printer, you should choose “Black and White”.  The program always graphs in color on the computer screen. 
Print Now 
Click on the “Print Now” button to print the current graph on the printer, the same as selecting the “Print” menu command. 
Data to Graph 
Click on this combo box for the  following list of Data Types to graph: 
• 
Engine RPM 

• 
MPH 

• 
Feet 

• 
Accel Gs 

• 
Engine HP 

• 
Clutch % (see Figures 2.14 - 2.17 on pages 43-48) 

• 
Throttle % (see Figures 2.14 - 2.17 on pages 43-48) 

• 
Clutch or Converter and Engine RPM (useful to check for clutch or converter slip) 


See Section 2.7 for more information about these data types. 
Plot Lines 
Thick Thin 
This section lets you pick the thickness of the graph lines.  Thick lines may show up better on the screen, but thin lines let you spot minor differences more easily.  This spec also affects how the graphs are printed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Background Color 
This section lets you pick the background color of the graph, either black or white.  Even if you select black, the background color when you print the graph will be white in most all cases. 
Baseline 
Graph with Baseline Graph without Baseline 
Click on “Graph without Baseline” for only the current run’s data to be graphed.  Click on “Graph with Baseline” to have ‘Baseline’ data plotted from a previous run for comparison.  You must click on “Graph with Baseline” before other options in this section are available. 
Prvs Run Always Changes to Baseline Baseline is a Selected Run 
Click on “Prvs Run Always Changes to Baseline” and the previous data will be the baseline run plotted. This is handy if you want to check the effect of every modification.  Simply make a change in a vehicle spec, calculate performance and then make a plot and the difference in the last 2 runs will be graphed. 
Click on “Baseline is a Selected Run” and one run remains the Baseline while you make several calculations.  When you first click on this option or the “Select Current Run as Baseline” button, the current data is saved as the Baseline run.  This is handy if you have a particular combination you are trying to improve upon while making several changes. 
Select Current Run as Baseline 
Click on this button to change the Baseline run to the current data.  This option is only available if you have selected the options “Graph with Baseline” and “Baseline is a Selected Run”. 
Appendix 5, page 169, New Features in v3.4 B discusses new Graphing features. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.3 Vehicle Library 
The Drag Racing Analyzer allows you to save a set of vehicle specifications to the Vehicle Library under a name of your choosing.  You can then open these vehicles out of the Vehicle Library in the future for comparison or modification.  The Open window is shown on the next page with explanations. 
Figure 3.7 Vehicle Library Options 
Click on Open button (or ‘File (vehicle)’, then ‘Load’) to display Vehicle Library shown here. (Save option also available after clicking on ‘File (vehicle)’.) 
Click on Save button to save current Vehicle specs to Library 

Total # Vehicles in Library 
Name of chosen Vehicle (currently highlighted in Vehicle List 
Preview of 
Vehicle chosen 
Click and drag slide bar to view all vehicles in list 
Single click on vehicle to choose it for preview. Double click to immed-
Click here to iately open it. open the 
Click here to bring up on
chosen screen help.
Click here to delete chosen Vehicle. 
Click here to close the Vehicle Library with 
No changes (without opening a vehicle) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Open a Vehicle File 
To open a vehicle file saved in the Library, either: 
• 
Click on the Open button 

• 
Click on the “File (vehicle)” menu item and then on the “Open Vehicle” options from the list. 


You will obtain the window shown on the previous page.  Single click on one of the vehicles in the list, or click and drag the slide button on the right side of the list to display more vehicles.  Once you single click on a vehicle, it is now the Chosen Vehicle File and a preview of the vehicle is given in the Preview section.  If the file you chose was not a valid Drag Racing Analyzer file, the program will tell you and you can not choose it. 
Once a vehicle has been chosen, you can delete it by clicking on the Delete button, or Open it by clicking on the Open button in this window.  You can also click on a different vehicle to Preview it or close this window and return to the Main Menu without choosing a new vehicle file. 
If you are sure of the vehicle you want to open, you can simply double click on it from the Vehicle List.  This opens the vehicle without a preview and closes this menu. 
Save a Vehicle File 
Before we discuss saving an engine file, it is important for you to understand how the program opens and uses vehicle files.  When you open a vehicle from the Vehicle Library, you are only using a copy of the vehicle.  The original vehicle file is kept in the library.   
As you make changes to the vehicle, they are only made to this copy.  The original file is not changed.  If you want to delete your changes, you can simply open a fresh, unchanged copy of the original vehicle file from the Library.  If you want to keep your changes, you must save them. This can be done by clicking on the Save button.  You are also asked if you want to save your changes whenever you open  a new vehicle, and the program has detected you have made changes to the current file. 
To save a Vehicle File, you will be presented with the Save Window as shown on the next page.  The program suggests a new vehicle name which is the same as the current vehicle name shown at the top of the Main Menu.  If you want to save your changes to the same name, simply click on OK.  This will update the current vehicle file with your latest changes. 
If you want to save the current set of vehicle specs with your changes to a new name (and leave the current vehicle file in the Library unchanged), then click on the suggested file name and modify it as you want.  For example, in the window shown on the next page, you may want to add -2 to the current name MUSTANG to create MUSTANG-2 to indicate this is the 2nd revision of MUSTANG.  This is the safest way to make changes, because you can always return to an earlier version and see what you had done. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.8 Saving Vehicle File Options 


Click on Save button to bring up this Save menu. 

Click here to save specs to New Vehicle name shown 

New name to save vehicle specs to. Leave unchanged and click OK to save to the current vehicle name. Click on name in box to change it, then click OK to save it to the new name. 
Name of current vehicle file you are working with 
Certain vehicle names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names over 50 characters long. 

• 
Names which include certain special characters, like the slash “/ “.  The program will warn you if a character is not acceptable. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Vehicle files are saved in the VEHDAT subdirectory in the DRA30 (subdirectory under PERFTRNS.PTI directory. Unlike earlier DOS Drag Racing Analyzer programs, you can copy Windows Drag Racing Analyzer files from programs on other computers to this directory and they will be found by the program.  
In version 3.4, the path to the VehDat folder is now:
  C:\Program Files\Performance Trends\Drag Racing Analyzer v3.4 
On Windows 7 and Vista computers it can be:
  C:\Program Files (x86)\Performance Trends\Drag Racing Analyzer v3.4 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.4 Printer Output 
The Drag Racing Analyzer can print the tabular test results for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer button.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.9 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the top for boxes.  All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 
Figure 3.9 Printer Command and Menu of Printer Output Options 
The Windows Printer Setup option lets you choose the printer or printer driver being used by Windows and also 
the page orientation. 
Click on Print or the Printer Button for the Printout Options menu shown to the right. 



Include Vehicle Specs 
Select this options if you want all the current Engine specs, Transmission specs, etc printed with the results.  This will add 1 page to the printed report. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Include Vehicle Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the complete vehicle printed with the results. 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular report you send to the printer.  These "report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like modifications, weather conditions, etc. 
See Appendix 3 and 4 for new Print features added in v3.2, 3.4 and 3.4 B.  Version 3.4 also allows you to include a graphics image (photograph) of your car for printing. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.5 History Log 
The Drag Racing Analyzer remembers the results and the vehicle specs which produced those results for up to the last 25 runs you have made.  This can be a very hand comparison of one run to another and saves you the trouble of making notes on pieces of paper.  It is also handy to be able to go back to some condition which gave very good performance, but you don’t remember why or what the specs were. 
Figure 3.10 shows the History Log  and options.  Example 4.1 discusses the History Options in detail. 

Test Title 
Click on Test Title and you are asked if you want to retrieve the specs which produced these results.  Answer Yes and the specs are retrieved.  Answer No and you can then change the Test Title.  This is useful for making notes about this particular run, modifications you made, etc. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Feet 
Is the distance of the race. The “Imprvmnts” in the History is only shown if the runs were for the same distance. 
Dnsy Alt 
Density Altitude in feet above sea level of the current track weather conditions. Many racers like this number for comparisons. It basically means for a standard 29.92" barometer, 60 deg, 0% humidity day what altitude would give the same barometric pressure as the current track conditions. 
Dry Dnsy Alt 
Dry Density Altitude in feet above sea level of the current track weather conditions, sometimes called Corrected Density Altitude (corrected for humidity). It basically means for a standard 29.92" barometer, 60 deg, 0% humidity day what altitude would give the same oxygen content as the current track conditions.  This is a better measure than Density Altitude for your car’s true HP potential. 
60 ft Imprvmnt ET Imprvmnt MPH Imprvmnt 
Are the test results for the particular run.  The Imprvmnts are the improvement of a particular run over the previous run.  Imprvmnt is left blank if the previous run was not for the same Feet distance as that particular run in the History log. 
If the Feet distances are 5280 ( 1 mile) or 7040 ft (the distance of El Mirage), the 60 foot time is actually the 660 foot (1/8 mile) time . If the Feet distance is are 26400 (the distance of Bonneville), the 60 foot time is actually the 2 mile time .   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Chapter 4 Examples 
Each of these examples become progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated. 
The results shown in these examples may be somewhat different than what you obtain with your particular version of the program That is due to minor upgrades in the calculations in later versions. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.1 Finding the Best Axle Ratio 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Read the Preliminary "Example To Get You Going" (Section 1.5) 

• 
Moving around in the menus and changing specs (Section 2.0, 2.2-2.6) 

• 
Calculate Performance and evaluating results (Section 2.7) 

• 
History Log (Section 3.5) 

• 
Obtaining a printed hardcopy of the results (Section 3.4) 


Example 4.1 will be fairly simple to get you started.  We will simulate a popular modification, installing a different rear axle ratio.  We will see the effect on 60 ft times, ET and MPH. 
First, start the Drag Racing Analyzer program following the procedure in Section 1.4 by either: 
• 
Clicking on the Drag Racing Analyzer v3.0 icon in the Perf. Trends program group (Windows 3.1) 

• 
Clicking on Start, Programs, Perf. Trends, then Drag Racing Analyzer v3.0 (Windows 95) 

• 
Clicking on the DRA.EXE (DRA) program under the DRA30 directory (folder) under the PERFTRNS.PTI directory (folder) using File Manager (Windows Explorer).  (Terms in parentheses are for Windows 95.) 


You will be shown the Drag Racing Analyzer’s Main Menu.  Notice at the top of the screen that the current Vehicle file is a GT5.0L (85 Mustang). 
If it is not GT5.0L or if you think the current GT 5.0L’s specs have been changed, you can Open up this Vehicle file by clicking on the Open button as shown in Figure 4.2.  Open the Vehicle file GT5.0L shown in Figure 4.2.  If you  have made any changes to the vehicle which originally appeared at the top of the Main Menu, the program will first ask you if you want to save these changes.  Answer No and you will be returned to the Main Menu with the GT5.0L specs loaded into the program. 
If you have a faster computer (Pentium), you may want calculations done in a slower, but more precise way.  This can be done by clicking on Preferences at the top of the Main Menu (Figure 4.1), then selecting .001 Sec Increments.  These increments will be used for all examples. 
Click on the different categories of vehicle specs or the Calculate Performance button on the Main Menu.  Since we want to see the effect of changing the axle ratio on this vehicle, we first need to get a "baseline" test. A "baseline" is a performance test before the modification.  Therefore, if you examine the contents of any component menus, leave all current values as they are.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.1 Main Menu Click Preferences to select .001 Sec Increments for results instead of the faster .01 Sec Increments 

Click here to show Calculatio n Conditions and then Calculate Perfor­mance. 
Click on the Calculate Performance button and you will now be shown the Calculation Conditions screen. This screen gives the conditions for calculating performance like track weather and wind, the length of the run and the rollout distance.  For now, leave these values as they are. 
Proceed with the calculations by clicking on the Calculate Performance button in this menu. 
Before calculations are started, basic checks are made of the input specs for unusual combinations, like a shift RPM higher than the engine’s maximum RPM, a clutch that is too small for the engine, etc.  In this case, the program sees no problems and the calculations proceed. 
The program will display  the Calculation Progress indicator as calculations progress.  When the calculations are finished, the performance results will look like Figure 4.3.  You now see a screen with columns of numbers describing the GT5.0L's run through the quarter mile.  At the top in the right corner is a summary of the run and any improvement between the current run and the last run.  The Last run can be from the last time you ran the program.  (The program remembers results from different sessions, between shutdowns and start ups.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.2 Vehicle Library 

Name of Vehicle the program is currently working with. The current specs may have been changed and be different than the Vehicle in Library of the same name. 
Click on the vehicle you want to Open to see a Preview. Double click to Open immediately. 
Preview of chosen (highlighted) vehicle. 
Click here to show 
Vehicle Library 
Figure 4.3 Test Results 

Performance 
Summary 
showing ET 
and MPH. 
Notes pointing out important things about this run. Click on Notes button or Analyze for more info. 
Click here or here to Graph. 
Finish ET and MPH from data columns. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Note the ET of 14.597 seconds with a MPH of 94.97 at the top of the report with the stock 3.08 axle.  However, in the columns of numbers you see Feet = 1320, Time = 14.597 sec, but MPH = 95.7, not 
94.97. This is because a drag strip has timing lights spaced 66 feet apart at the end of the quarter mile.  These lights are used to determine the vehicle's speed at the end of the run.  Even though the GT5.0L was doing 95.7 MPH at 1320 FEET, it only averaged 94.97 MPH over the last 66 ft of the 1320 FEET.  See Section 2.7.2, Calculate Performance Output. 
Other important things to look for in the Test Results screen include: 
Notice that the Notes Summary is pointing out a couple of things:  Clutch Slip High and Low Tire Traction. If you click on the Notes button, you obtain the screen shown in Figure 4.4.  These notes can be useful for understanding your performance, however, for now you are going to stick with the street tires, which are probably limiting performance. 

To obtain a graph of these results, click on the Graph button or Graph menu item. The program will present a graph  similar to that shown in Figure 4.5 of Engine RPM.  If you do not see a graph of Engine RPM, click on Data Types at the top of the graph and select Engine RPM. 
Since the Notes pointed out high clutch slip, you might want to try the Converter or Clutch and Engine RPM Graph Data Type.  Here you can see where clutch RPM is less than Engine RPM (clutch slipping) and where they match (clutch not slipping).  See Figure 4.6. 
Much of the reason there is so much clutch slip in first gear is the Launch Type in the Driving Specs menu is set to Computer Driven Launch.  The computer is going full throttle on the 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.6 Graph of Converter or Clutch and Engine RPM (clutch slip) 

Clutch RPM less than Engine RPM (clutch slipping) 
Clutch RPM matching Engine RPM (clutch not slipping) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
engine and “feathering” the clutch to prevent these street tires from breaking loose.  This provides for nearly the best launch with these tires, but produces a lot of clutch slip (and clutch wear in the real car). 
Changing the Rear Axle Ratio 
Now for the good part; lets change the gear ratio and see what happens.  Get back to the Main Menu by clicking on Back in the menu bar (or pressing <ESC>) at the graph screen (Figure 4.5), then clicking on Back (or pressing <ESC>) again at the tabular Test Results screen (Figure 4.3). 

Click on Body & Axle to bring up the menu shown in Figure 4.7.  Because you can make many modifications on the computer easily, it is not necessary to install only 1 different axle ratio.  In fact, you learn more by installing several ratios with only small changes so you can clearly see trends. 
Lets arbitrarily choose axle ratios starting at a point we believe will definitely hurt performance, and increment through what we believe will be the best ratio.  For example, we could start at 2.0 and increment in .50 ratio increments to 5.5.  With wrenches, money, parts and a drag strip, this could take 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
several days. On the computer we will be done in a few minutes, with clean fingernails and money left in our wallet!    
Click on Final Drive Ratio under Axle Specs and type 2 over the current value of 3.08.  (If 2 had not been within acceptable limits, the program will display the limits.) Then click on OK to return to the Main Menu.  There you can click on Calculate Performance, then the Calculate Performance button at this menu (as you did before) or just click on the Calc ET button at the  top of the Main Menu.  The Calc ET button is a shortcut. 
Figure 4.8 Test Results with 2.0 Axle Ratio 

Figure 4.8 shows an ET of 15.149 at 95.14 MPH, with an "improvement" of -.556 seconds (actually a .556 second slower ET).  However, MPH actually did improved .17 MPH with the 2.0 axle.  This shows a big increase in ET (slower), as we expected. The negative (-) improvements mean that performance was hurt by the last modification.   
An alternate way to see this comparison and improvement is to display the Test History Log.  Click on History as shown in Figure 4.8 and select Always Show History.  You will get the screen of Figure 4.9 with a history and comparison of the last 25 runs.  (Although only 7 runs show, you can click and slide the slide bar to see all 25.) 
The History Log is a convenient way to keep track of your results to watch trends.  We will use it here to find the best axle ratio. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Graph these results with the Baseline 3.08 axle results for the graph in Figure 4.10.  Figure 4.10 points out a couple of things: 
• 
Engine RPM drops to 2000 RPM during the launch, possibly “bogging” the engine.  That’s because with less torque multiplication in the rear axle, the computer releases the clutch much faster because traction is not a problem.  This pulls down engine RPM during the launch. 

• 
The clutch locks up (stops slipping) much faster, again because of less traction problems, the clutch is released faster. 

• 
The run is made in only 2 gears, and finishes the run during the 2-3 shift. 


Click on Back to return to the Test Results screen, then click on History and Clear History.  You will see all the History rows blanked out except the current 2.0 axle ratio results.  Another useful feature of the History Log is the ability to change the Test Title in the first column to anything you want.  Click on the Test Title for the 2.0 axle ratio run, then answer No to the question “Retrieve the specs which produced these results?”.  You will be shown a test input box like that of Figure 4.11.  (You will find the ability to Retrieve specs which produces certain results in the History Log to also be a very useful feature.) 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Now go through the sequence of: 
• 
Increasing the Final Drive Ratio by .5 

• 
Calculating results 

• 
Changing the time of day in the Test Title to the axle ratio just tested. 


Once you have increased the axle ratio to 5.0, you will get a History Log that looks like Figure 4.12.  Possibly to your surprise, the 3.0 ratio (close to the stock  3.08) is near optimum.  You may then think "Why do drag cars have such low (high numerical) axle ratios?"  Lets run these axle ratios again, with the GT5.0L set up for drag racing.  Lets install slicks and drive more aggressively by changing the things identified in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Modifications To Set Up GT5.0L for "Serious" Drag Racing 
Action on actual car  Modification in the program to simulate this action  
Install 8” Slicks  Construction changed to Drag Slicks and Tread Width changed to 8 in the Wheel/Tires menu. (For now, lets assume the slicks are no "taller" or heavier than the original street tires, leave the Wheels/Tires Wt, lbs at 50 and Tire Diameter at 24.9.)  
Aggressive Launch  Launch RPM changed to 5000 in the Driving Specs menu.  
Power Shifts  Shift Time reduced to “.2 Fast” and Shift % Throttle increased to “100 Power Shifts” in the Driving Specs menu.  


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.13 shows that lower (higher numerical) axle ratios do improve ET when the vehicle has enough traction to take advantage of the extra torque multiplication.  Figure 4.13 shows the best ET of 13.713 occurs with gear ratio of 4.0.   
Conclusions: 
• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer allows you to easily maneuver between screens and menus with the click on a mouse. 

• 
The program has several useful features like .001 Sec Increments (time) for improved accuracy, the Performance Summary and History Log to track you changes, and the Notes and Graphs to understand and analyze your performance. 

• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer allows you to simulate "real world" modifications by simply typing in new specifications which simulate the hardware modification. 

• 
Like most other vehicle settings, there is no single "best" axle ratio for the GT5.0L.  The "best" ratio will change depending on other vehicle specs, for example like Tire specs which affect traction. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.2 Calibrating the Drag Racing Analyzer for Your Car 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Changing Calculate Performance Conditions (Section 2.7) 

• 
Using Calculation Menus (Section 2.8) 

• 
Adjusting specifications to match actual vehicle performance (Appendix 3) 

• 
Using the Match Vehicle Performance Option (Section 2.9) 


When using the Drag Racing Analyzer to predict the effect of modifications on a certain vehicle, it is best to first "calibrate" the program to match the vehicle's actual results.  "Calibrate" means to fine tune an instrument (the Drag Racing Analyzer in this case) to improve its accuracy.  Once the program is calibrated, its predictions are more likely to match your vehicle's response to modifications. 
This example will be used as part of Example 4.3 also, which deals with predicting Bracket Racing "dial ins". Since these "dial ins" must be adjusted for minor changes in weather, we will use .001 Sec Increments, as also done in Example 4.1.  Click on Preferences in the Main Menu and select .001 Sec Increments. You will notice the program warning you that the results may change slightly, because you are now asking for higher resolution time calculations.   
We will calibrate the program for a 1971 Monte Carlo, with a 502 cubic inch big block and 400 Turbo Hydra-Matic.  The car runs 10.12 ETs at 133.1 MPH.  There are no vehicles in the Vehicle Library exactly like this, so we will have to build our own. 
The 69-MACH1 is approximately the right size and is an automatic, but it is a production car.  The SPR­STCK.V-6 is a 2 speed automatic with a V-6 engine, but is already set up for drag racing.  We choose to start with the SPR-STCK.V-6 file.  Once you are finished following Example 4.2, you should have a set of specifications which should match the file EXAMPLE4.2 in the Vehicle Library. (If we had chosen the 69-MACH1, calibrating would follow the same basic procedure, and the results would have been equally as accurate. You just have to change more specs.) 
First, you must have results from a "good" run where you know the track conditions, likeTable 4.2. 
Next, open a fresh copy of the SPR-STCK.V-6 from the Vehicle Library by clicking on the Open button at the top left of the Main Menu as shown in Example 4.1.  Enter the Monte Carlo's specs into the program as follows: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Table 4.3: 1971 Monte Carlo Running 10.12 @ 133.1 MPH 

Critical Specs  Measured/Known Value  Drag Racing Analyzer Input  
Weight w driver  3200  Vehicle Weight, lbs in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Rear axle wt w driver  1400  % Wt on Rear Tires in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Wheelbase  105  Wheelbase in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Aerodynamic Cd  ?  Drag Coefficient in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Rear Axle Ratio  4.56  Final Drive Ratio in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Engine displacement  502 cid  Displacement, CID in Engine specs menu  
Converter  yes  Clutch/Tq Converter Type: Pick Example Converter  
Transmission  Turbo Hydra-Matic 400  Transmission Type: Pick Example Transmission  
1st shift RPM  7400  1-2 Shift RPM in Driving Specs menu  
2nd shift RPM  7400  2-3 Shift RPM in Driving Specs menu  
Rear Tires, 32 x 14 slicks  Drag Slicks  Rear Tire Construction Type: Drag Slicks in Wheels/Tires menu  
Rear Tires, 32 x 14 slicks  32  Rear Tire Diameter in Wheels/Tires menu  
Rear Tires, 32 x 14 slicks  14  Rear Tire Tread Width in Wheels/Tires menu  
Rear Tires, traction  ?  Rear Tire Traction Factor in Wheels/Tires menu  
Track Conditions:  
Weather Instruments  Radio Weather Report  Method of Recording Weather Data: Radio/TV Weather Report with Dew Point  
ET, 1/4 mile  10.12  
60 ft  1.48  
MPH, 1/4 mile  133.1  
Observed RPM, 1/4 mile  7200  
Observed Stall RPM  4500  
Barometric Pressure  29.46 **  Baro Pressure, “Hg in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Air Temp (dry bulb)  83  Air Temperature in Calculate  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Performance Conditions menu  
Wet Bulb Temp  73  Dew Point, deg F in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Track Elevation  860  Elevation, ft in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Wind Speed  5  Head Wind MPH in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Headwind  5  Head Wind Direction: Headwind in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  

  ** From your own weather station instrument, measuring actual (not corrected) barometric pressure.        
Engine specs 
Click on Engine specs at the Main Menu to display the current power specs for the Super Stock V-6.  Change Displacement to 502.  Then select the Method of Describing Power Curve which makes the most sense: 
• 
If you had a complete dyno curve, you could pick Specified Full Curve and enter the dyno curve in the right hand section of this screen. 

• 
You could pick an Example Power Curve and try to find something that you think would be close to your big block Chevy. 

• 
If you know very little about the engine or power curves in general, it is probably best to pick Specified HP Only.  This option lets the program decide the shape of the power curve.  


This is the one you pick. 
Now, to estimate the amount of HP coming from this engine, click on the Clc button by the Peak HP spec.  You will see the Calculation Menu of Figure 4.14. Most all the input specs are disabled (dimmed to gray and they do not respond to inputs) except Type of Calc.  Click on this combo box and select Quarter Mile MPH, because you know this but you do not know Eighth Mile MPH or you would have to estimate Vol Eff.  Now several specs are enabled. They are loaded with values taken from the SPR-STCK.V-6. 
For inputs to this menu, change Vehicle Weight from 2300 for the SPR-STCK.V-6 to the Monte’s 3200 lbs.  Enter 133.1 for Quarter Mile MPH.  Assume your RPM 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
at HP Peak occurs a few hundred RPM before your shift points, for example 6900 RPM.  Change the V­6’s 7800 RPM to your estimate of 6900 for your Big Block Chevy. 
The values in your calculation screen should now look like those in Figure 4.14.  Click on Use Calc 

Value to load all the calculated values into the Engine Specs menu.  The program asks if you want to use the 3200 lbs you entered here as the actual Vehicle Weight of this car, loaded in the Body & Axle menu.  Since you do want to use it, answer Yes.  Also notice (as said in the Notes of the Calculation Menu), the Power Corr is always set to Std Dyno (29.92 and 60 deg) after using this menu to calculate Power Curve specs. The General Engine Specs menu should now look like Figure 4.15. 
Calculate Performance Conditions 
Although it seems a little out of order to enter the Calculate Performance conditions now, the weather conditions in this menu are used for some torque converter calculations.  So we will enter the Weather conditions now.  Click on the Calculate Performance button.  Before entering weather conditions, select the appropriate Method of Reading Weather Data. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
You use your own barometer instrument which reads actual (not corrected) barometer and have a wet and dry bulb psychrometer for humidity.  Click on the Method of Reading Weather Data and select Uncorr Baro and Rel Hum.  There is no Wet and Dry Bulb Humidity option. Uncorr Baro and Dew Point would have been equally valid.  You will have to calculate Rel Humidity from Wet and Dry bulb measurements by clicking on the Rel. Humidity’s Clc button. Notice that Elevation becomes disabled since you barometer measures the actual air pressure, and an elevation correction is not needed. 
Enter your barometer reading of 29.46 and the dry bulb reading of 83 for Air Temp.  For Rel Humidity,  click on the Clc button.  Select No for Know Dew Point and Wet and Dry Bulb inputs become enabled, Dry Bulb already filled in with the 83 degree Air Temperature.  Type in 73 degrees and press <Enter> to obtain the calculated 62% Relative Humidity.  Click on Use Calc Value  to load 62% back into the Calculate Performance Conditions menu. 
Next select Headwind as the Direction for Wind Specs, which enables Wind Speed where you enter the Wind Speed of 5 MPH .  For Rollout, leave the SPR-STCK.V-6’s selection of ‘10” medium’ because you are not sure what your rollout is.  Rollout is not critical if  you just want to predict performance changes. 
The Calculate Performance Conditions menu should now look like Figure 4.17.  Click on Return to return to the Main Menu. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Transmission Specs 
Click on the Transmission button menu at the Main for the Transmission Specs menu.  For Clutch/Converter, the Type is already set to “Torque Converter:  Use Specs Below”. You will see the clutch specs are disabled (dimmed to gray) indicating they are not used in the calculations. 
You will notice the Converter Capacity was 385 for the V-6 and shows a 7480 RPM for the current Stall RPM.  This makes sense since this is was a loose converter for a higher RPM, lower torque producing engine.  Now the converter has now been coupled with a high torque big block.  Stall speed would be very high.  You could pick an example converter or simply enter your known stall RPM of 4500 and press enter. The program responds that due to rounding in the calculations, the resulting Converter Capacity of 212.7 gives a Stall RPM of 4620. This is adequate for our purposes, because we can’t read the tachometer that accurate anyway.  For Torque Multiplication, we change the left over 1.7 from the V­6 to a more typical 2.0. (Notice how this Stall RPM is based on the current Power Curve and Track Weather Conditions, which is why we entered Weather Specs before going to the Transmission Specs.) 
Click on the Transmission Type combo box and select Pick Example Transmission.  From the list of transmissions, select the  Auto-Turbo Hydra-Matic 400.  Either double click on it to select it in one stroke, or click on it to highlight it, then click on the Pick button.  You  will next be presented with a 

screen comparing the SPR-STCK.V-6’s Powerglide transmission specs to the TH400’s.  Click on this screen’s Load these Example Specs button.  Then you will see a general description of the example transmission specs, and then you  will be returned to the Transmission Specs menu with the TH400’s specs loaded in. The Transmission Specs menu will now look like Figure 4.19. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Body & Axle 
Click on Body & Axle at the Main Menu to open this menu.  You’ll see 3200 lbs already entered, from when we used 3200 lbs to calculate the HP based on quarter mile MPH.  For Axle specs enter the Monte’s 4.56, and leave the Diff Lock Eff at 100% Spool. 
For Body Details, click on Type and select Pick Example Body Details.  There are no Monte Carlos in the list, so select the closest match of Typical 60s/70s Intermediate.  This will load several specs, but you will fine tune some to match your known measurements.  First, click on the Clc button for % Wt on Rear to open its Calculation Menu.  Enter the known weight of 1400 lbs for Weight on 1 Axle and select Rear for Which Axle.  It calculates 43.8% as the Calculated % Wt on Rear Tires.  Click on Use Calc Value to load it into the Body Details.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Also, type in your measured Wheelbase of 105 instead of the example’s spec of 108, and measured Rear Track Width of 50 versus the examples 60.  (The Monte’s rear axle is narrowed to accommodate the 14” slicks.)  In the process of changing these specs from the Examples, the program will warn you that the specs will no longer accurately represent the example, and the name will be changed to Use Specs Below.  Select the Yes answer to the question “Change these specs anyway?”  The Body & Axle menu should now look like Figure 4.20. 
Wheels & Tires 
For Front Wheel/Tire specs, you weigh a wheel and tire and come up with 20 lbs.  The diameter you measure at about 22”.  You keep the Front Wheel/Tire Type of “Use Specs Below”, and enter these measurements.  (Actually, Front Wheel/Tire(s) specs are not that critical unless you are estimating a performance improvement by modifying Front Wheel/Tire weight or diameter.  If the measurements were not available, you could have simply selected “Let Program Estimate” for the Type.) 
For Rear Wheel/Tire Specs, select Pick Example Wheel/Tires from the list of Types.  Select the Example Goodyear Superstock 32 x 14 Drag Slicks.  The Wheel & Tire specs menu should now look like Figure 4.21. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Driving Specs 
At the Driving Specs menu, you see most of the specs are disabled indicating these values will not be used in the calculations. Leave the Launch Specs Type set to Computer Driven-No Tire Spin.  This is the easiest way to get nearly optimum launches without having to constantly adjust the launch specs. 
Also leave Shift Time at .4 Shift Kit as the SPR-STCK.V-6 was using.  Set the 1-2 Shift RPM and 2-3 Shift RPM to your shift RPMs of 7400 for both.  Driving Specs should now look like Figure 4.22. 
At last, we’ve adjusted all specs as close as we reasonably can.  Now return to the Main Menu and calculate Performance.  You obtain  an ET of 10.426, a MPH of 127.93 and a 60 ft of 1.510, all 3 which are close, but slightly slower than what you actually ran.   
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Match Vehicle Performance Feature 
The program is currently predicting your car runs slower than your actual car runs.  We should fine tune these specs to get a better match between real time slips and what the program predicts.  In previous versions of Drag Racing Analyzer and in other programs on the market, this would mean doing a lot of “cut and try”.  Adjust a spec, see if you got a better match on, say 60 foot time.  If you did, now did you “screw up” your MPH, ET, etc. 
The solution is the Match Vehicle Performance option, available at the Main Menu.  Return to the Main Menu from the Test Results screen of Figure 4.23.  Click on the Match Veh Perf button at the top, to display the menu similar to Figure 4.24.  Enter in your actual performance, including the engine RPM as you go through the traps (at the end of the quarter mile) of 7500 RPM.  It should look like Figure 4.24.  Then click on the OK (adjust veh. specs to match performance) button. 

The program makes several passes adjusting critical specs between each pass, fine tuning the specs to find a combination which best matches your actual vehicle’s performance.  After 20­30 passes, it arrives at the combination shown in Figure 4.25.  At the top of this menu you see how close these new specs will make the performance match.  In the lower section, you see the Old specs, and the new ones arrived at, which you can either Keep, or discard and return to the old specs. You see that the only New spec which is much different than the old specs in Engine Pk HP, which has increased from 620 to 704 HP. 
Click on the Keep These New Specs button to keep these new specs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Note: The combination of specs arrived at by the Match Vehicle Performance feature are not necessarily the most accurate combination of specs to match your car. 
The menu of Figures 4.24 and 4.25 are now gone. At the Main Menu, calculated performance and you confirm these specs do give results as stated by the Match Vehicle Performance screens, and that do match your car, just as shown in Figure 4.25.  The ET of 10.081, which was not an input in the Match Vehicle Performance menu, also matches quite closely to your actual ET of 10.12. 
Return to the Main Menu and click in the Vehicle Comments section 

and change them to match these specs for your 71 Monte Carlo.  Figure 4.27 shows what you could type 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
in for comments. 
When finished, click on the Save button, or on File and then Save Vehicle.  You are first as shown Figure 
4.26. You answer No, since these specs no longer represent the SPR-STCK.V-6, but that you want to give it a new name.  Next the screen shown in Figure 4.27 is displayed.  Change the New Vehicle Name from SPR-STCK.V-6 to something that matches these specs, like MY-CAR or 71MONTE. 
Now you are ready to check various modifications on your vehicle, like changing gear ratios, tire size, or shift points, etc. See Example 4.3. 
Conclusions: 
• 
After accurately entering specs, and then fine tuning them with the Match Vehicle Performance feature, the Drag Racing Analyzer's results can closely match the results of most any specific vehicle. 

• 
The program has several options for entering specs, like picking example specs from preloaded lists, or by calculating them using Calculation menus from other known information or measurements 

• 
You can make most any file from the Vehicle Library match your vehicle's specs following this procedure. Then you can save all these specs under a new name in the library for use at any time in the future. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.3 Predict Bracket Racing "Dial In" 
Important: See Appendix 3, page 155, for new features in Version 3.2. 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Predicting detailed performance changes based on weather changes (Section 2.7) 

• 
Dial In Prediction Menu (Section 2.11) 


One place computers are widely used is in Bracket Racing, where the racer must accurately predict their ET before the race. This predicted ET is called the "dial in" and is used for setting starting handicaps.  Example 4.3 will demonstrate how to use the Drag Racing Analyzer for determining your "dial in". 
Matching Your Vehicle’s Performance 
The first step is to get the computer results to match your actual drag strip results.  For Example 4.3, we will use the 1971 Monte Carlo file which was developed in Example 4.2. This file is in the Vehicle Library under the name EXAMPLE4.2, so click on the Open button (or Click on File and then Open) and open this file. 
For your own vehicle, follow the procedure in Example 4.2 to match the Drag Racing Analyzer to your vehicle specs for some "good running" day.  When the Drag Racing Analyzer's predicted results match your vehicle's results, save these specs to the Vehicle Library.  Use a new vehicle name like "133-10.12" which could be for the your vehicle running 133.1 MPH in 10.12 seconds. 
Note: .001 Sec Increments 
Since we will be looking for very minor ET changes, we should select the .001 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu.  This will have the program calculate all time results to the nearest thousandth of a second. This was done in Example 4.2.  Calculate performance for the file EXAMPLE4.2 file and you obtain 10.081 @ 133.25 MPH. 
Open Up Dial In Menu 
Once you have developed a set of vehicle specs which represent your car, click on the Dial In button at the top of the Main Menu.  These vehicle specs do not have to produce your ET and MPH exactly, but should be within a couple of MPH and a couple of tenths of the ET.  You are first given a notice to this 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
effect as shown in Figure 4.28.  Click 
on Yes and you will see a screen similar to that shown in Figure 4.29. 
First, since you are starting a new sequence of runs at a new race, click on File and then New.  This will blank out all the entries. 

Figure 4.29 Dial In Menu Click on File and then New to blank out all entries 

Select the Method of Reading Weather Data which best matches your instrument package. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Next, obtain current weather conditions for the drag strip.  For this example, we are using a commercial "Weather Station" package: 
• 
A barometer instrument which reads our actual observed barometric pressure from 28" to 32" Hg. 

• 
A dial thermometer for air temperature. 

• 
A dial hygrometer which reads out in % Relative Humidity. 

• 
Wind speed and direction you obtain from a hand held "wind speed meter and compass". 


The Method of Reading Weather Data of “Uncorr. Baro and Rel. Hum.” exactly matches your instrument package, so select it. 
Load In a Practice Run 
You make your first practice run, recording 10.150 at 134.2 with a 1.521 60 foot time.  The weather for this run was: 
• 
28.56 " Hg • 74 degrees 

• 
72 % relative humidity 

• 
14 MPH tail wind (helping push the car down the track) 


Enter this data into the Dial In menu for the Previous Run as shown in Figure 4.30.  You are now ready to start predicting future runs. 
Predict Dial In 
For your first round, you measure the weather as: 
• 
28.79 " Hg • 81 degrees 

• 
66 % relative humidity 

• 
7 MPH tail wind (helping push the car down the track) 


The weather specs for both the Practice (Previous) run and the Predicted run are shown in Figure 4.30.  The program predicts a 10.187 ET or “Dial In” based on your first run and the change in weather.  This is what the program predicts the car will run, but you may not want to use this number for your Dial In, “as is”, but subtract off a safety factor. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

This safety factor would prevent you from "breaking out" should the car run slightly quicker than the predicted ET. You will have to use your judgment based on your competition for the safety margin you need. If you have good competition, you will have to risk breaking out and use a small safety factor, for example .005 seconds.  If you competition is poor, use a larger factor, for example .03 seconds.  Subtract this safety margin from  the Predicted Dial In for your actual "dial in".  For example, with stiff competition your "dial in" would be: 
"Dial In" = 10.187 -.005 = 10.182 seconds 
Note:  The Safety Margin is now a separate input in Version 3.2.  See Appendix 3, page 155 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
You will notice in Figure 4.30 there is a spec directly above the Dial In box called Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time.  In this example, we let the program estimate how 60 foot time would change.  When you choose this, the program basically assumes traction will stay the same, and any change in 60 foot time is due to more or less engine power due to changes in air conditions.  It assumes the tires and track have the same traction as the Previous run. 
However, let say you believe that you will run a .030 second quicker 60 foot time than on the Previous run. This may be due to one lane being stickier than another, or other changes in the track conditions.  Under this condition, a better choice for Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time may be “You enter (predict) 60 ft time below”.  Then the spec 60 Foot Time for the Predicted run becomes enabled, and you can enter your estimate of what the 60 foot time would be. 
Next Run 
Assume you win your first round.  For the next round’s Dial In, click on  the Advance command at the top of the Dial In menu as shown in Figure 4.31.  The program will copy all the weather information from the Predicted Run to the Previous Run and leave the Predicted run blank.  Fill in your actual ET and 60 foot time for this last run.  Assuming you ran 10.193 with a 1.528 60 foot time, fill in these values.  Then fill in the weather for the next round into the Predicted Run column.  When finished, click on the 
Figure 4.31 Dial In Menu After Using the Advance Command 
Click on Advance to move Predicted weather conditions to Previous Run 

Predicted Run is blanked out 
ET and 60 foot time are blanked out for you to enter your actual numbers. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Clc button by Dial In or the Update Prediction command.  The new predicted Dial In is 10.265 as shown in Figure 4.32. This is how you will proceed, advancing the Predicted Run‘s weather and actual ET and 60 foot time to the Previous Run, and coming up with new Dial Ins through the rounds. 
Figure 4.32 Dial In Menu Predicting Dial In for the Next Round 

Conclusions: 
• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer can make detailed ET predictions based on changes to weather conditions. 

• 
The Dial In menu makes calculating Dial Ins for Bracket Racing convenient. 

• 
Using .001 Sec Increments (instead of .01 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu) lets the program make ET and Dial In predictions in thousandths of a second. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.4 Predict Throttle Stop to Run Index 
Important: See Appendix 3, page 155, for new features in Version 3.2. 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): • Example 4.2 and 4.3 
• 
Throttle Stop, Section 2.10 

• 
Track Weather Specs, Section 2.7.2 


This example is very similar to Example 4.3 except, instead of predicting your ET, you must change your throttle stop setting to run a specified ET. Like a Dial In , you will record weather conditions and ET for a previous run (in this case 2 runs) and input weather conditions for a future run to Predict.  Instead of telling you the ET the car will run for this Predicted Run, the program tells you how to set your throttle stop to run your desired ET. 
Matching Your Vehicle’s Performance 
The first step is to get the computer results to match your actual drag strip results.  See Example 4.2 for this. For this example we will use the Super Gas Grand Am vehicle SG-GRAND.-AM.  Open this file from the Vehicle Library.  This car runs about 9.68 ETs with no throttle stop.  The throttle stop is used to slow it down to running the 9.90 index of the NHRA Super Gas class. 
Open Up Dial In Menu 
Once you have developed a set of vehicle specs which represent your car, click on the Throttle Stop button at the top of the Main Menu.  These vehicle specs do not have to produce your ET and MPH exactly, but should be within a couple of MPH and a couple of tenths of the ET.  You are first given a notice to this effect as shown in Figure 4.33.  Click on Yes and you will see a screen similar to that shown in Figure 4.34. 
First, since you are starting a new sequence of runs at a new race, click on File and then New.  This will blank out all the entries. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Next, you will need 2 Previous or practice runs. These are very important and must be obtained with 2 very different throttle stop settings.  The throttle stop settings must produce at least a .3 second difference in ET. 
The throttle stop setting is usually the time the stop is On (or has the throttles closed) you set on the throttle stop timer.  This usually has the finest control and best repeatability.   



Figure 4.34 Throttle Stop Menu Click on File and then New to blank out all entries Select the Method of Reading Weather Data which best matches your instrument package. 


Enter your desired ET (Index 
+ any safety 
i) Enter the time the throttle stop first comes 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
General Specs and Comments 
Method of Recording Weather Data:  For this example, we are using: 
• 
An altimeter, which is corrected to 29.92” mercury 

• 
A mercury thermometer for air temperature 

• 
A dial hygrometer which reads out in % Relative Humidity. 

• 
Wind speed and direction you obtain from a hand held "wind speed meter and compass". 


The Method of Reading Weather Data of “Altimeter and Rel. Hum.” exactly matches your instrument package, so select it. Note that the Barometer input is disabled.  You will enter your altimeter reading as Altimeter in feet of altitude. 
Your throttle stop timer is set to come on 3 seconds after the trans brake releases, so enter 3 for T/S Start Time. 
You are running in the 9.90 index class.  However, instead of typing in the 9.90 index, you type in 9.91 to give yourself a .010 second safety margin for breaking out.  If you run too quick, you “break out” and loose. Should your car run up to .010 seconds faster than you expect, you still will not break out. 
Load In 2 Practice Runs 
Recommended Steps for Recording Previous Runs 
Previous Run #1:  The first run can be made with a very short throttle stop setting, perhaps only .2 seconds On. Based on your experience, we make run  with the throttle stop timer set for .75 seconds and record the weather, 60 foot time, ET and the throttle stop setting. 
Previous Run #2: The second run must produce at least a .3 second increase in ET.  Ideally, it will produce an ET approximately equal to or slightly slower than your desired or Index ET.  Again based on your experience, adjust the throttle stop timer to be on for say 1.5 seconds.  Make a run like this, and record the weather, 60 foot time, ET and the throttle stop setting. 
It is critical that the difference in the throttle stop settings for these 2 Previous Runs produce at least a .3 second difference in ET. 
Fill in the data for these 2 Previous Runs as shown in Figure 4.35. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Predict Throttle Stop 
For your first round, the air continues to improve.  You measure the weather as: 
• 
1415 feet altitude or Elevation • 75 degrees 

• 
68.6 % relative humidity 

• 
7 MPH side wind 


The weather specs for both the Previous runs and the Predicted run are shown in Figure 4.35.  For this round, you are getting the left lane, which everyone is complaining is .02 seconds slower for 60 foot times.  Knowing this, you select “You enter (predict) 60 foot time below” for “Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time”, and enter 1.425, which is about .02 seconds slower (longer) than your Previous Run 60 foot times. 
Click on the Clc button by Throttle Stop, and the program recommends you use a 1.333 second throttle stop setting. Enter this number into your throttle stop timer.  Remember, because you’ve already added 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
in a safety factor of .010 seconds, you do not need to adjust the 1.333 seconds for a safety factor.  Use the 
1.333 seconds exactly. 
Note:  The Safety Margin is now a separate input in Version 3.2.  See Appendix 3, page 155 
Next Run 
Assume you win your first round with a 9.905 ET.  For the next round’s Throttle Stop prediction you are tempted to use your latest run to help predict a new throttle stop.  However, because the difference between Previous Run #1 and your latest run is less than .3 seconds (9.905-9.760 = .145), the accuracy would not be good and the program recommends you do not do it. Actually, the program will not even calculate a Throttle Stop setting for the Predicted run if the ETs for the Previous run are not at least .2 seconds or more.  So, from now on, simply enter the new weather conditions for each round into the Predicted Run.  Enter your estimate of 60 foot time, or let the program estimate it, and set the new Throttle Stop setting on your timer for the new weather conditions. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer can predict a throttle stop setting to run a certain ET (Index) under changing weather conditions, based on 2 previous runs with different throttle stop settings which produce at least .3 seconds difference in ET. 

• 
Using .001 Sec Increments (instead of .01 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu) lets the program make 60 foot, ET and Throttle Stop predictions in thousandths of a second. 


Important: See Appendix 3, page 155, for new features in Version 3.2 which make Throttle Stop Predictions easier. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
Background: 
The Drag Racing Analyzer was developed as a: 
• 
Tool to help predict effects of certain engine and vehicle modifications for engine builders, drag racers, and performance enthusiasts. 

• 
"Theoretical Drag Strip" to allow anyone to try things which are too expensive, difficult, dangerous, or impossible with a real vehicle. 

• 
Learning aid for those who want to better understand vehicle dynamics during full power acceleration. 


The Drag Racing Analyzer will provide you an engineering estimate of what should occur when general modifications are made based on the principles of vehicle dynamics and physics.  By seeing all the specifications which go into the calculated results, you may have a false sense that the computer knows your vehicle exactly; what manufacturer's torque converter you are using, who built the chassis, what your 4 link settings are, etc.  Actually the computer does not know if the specifications are for a production Yugo or a Record Holding Funny Car. 
A good analogy to the Drag Racing Analyzer is a flow bench.  A flow bench can not predict exact torque and HP curves, but is still a vital tool for engine development.  In the same way, use the Drag Racing Analyzer results as a guide or second opinion of how your vehicle should perform under near optimum conditions. 
Iterations 
Before we talk about accuracy, it is important for you to understand the types of calculations going on inside the Drag Racing Analyzer and other sophisticated simulation programs.  A simple program could involve calculating quarter mile MPH from HP and vehicle weight: 
Quarter Mile MPH = K1 x Engine HP _Vehicle Weight 


You enter an engine HP and Vehicle Weight and obtain a quarter mile MPH value.  The answer you obtain on the left side of the equation has no effect on the inputs on the right side of the equation. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
However, lets look at a simplified version of the equation which the Drag Racing Analyzer uses just to calculate the maximum potential tractive force (traction) the tires can produce. 
Max Tractive Force = Tire Friction x ( Wt on Rear Tires + Wt Transfer ) 
Where: Wt Transfer depends on the vehicle's acceleration rate which depends on the tires Max Tractive Force. 
In this case the "Max Tractive Force" answer you get on the left side has an effect on the inputs to the equation on the right.  The only way to solve equations like this is through "iterations".  Iteration is a process where you assume an answer, use that answer in the right side of the equation, calculate the actual answer and see if the actual answer is "close enough" to the answer you assumed.  
Iteration Process: (For this example we will not use actual numbers since the calculations are quite complex) Assume Max Tractive Force is 3000 lbs Calculate that the vehicle acceleration could be .8 Gs and the Wt Transfer value is 600 lbs Using the Wt Transfer of 600 lbs, we now calculate that the Max Tractive Force is 3200 lbs Are assumed Max Tractive Force and calculated Max Tractive Force "close enough" (within 20 pounds) No, so do again using new Max Tractive Force answer Calculate that the vehicle acceleration could be .85 Gs and the Wt Transfer value is 640 lbs Using the Wt Transfer of 640 lbs, we now calculate that the Max Tractive Force is 3218 lbs Are assumed Max Tractive Force and calculated Max Tractive Force "close enough" (within 20 pounds) Yes, so an approximate answer is: Max Tractive Force = 3218 lbs 
If "close enough" was 200 lbs, our first answer of 3200 lbs would have been good enough.  If "close enough" was 1 lb, it may require many more calculations to arrive at an answer which is "close enough".  If the equation is very complex and the inputs are an unusual combination, no answer may be reached no matter how many times the calculation is performed.  This is called "not converging on a solution".   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Making the tolerance ("close enough") small will produce more exact answers but will require more calculation time.  Performance Trends has selected tolerance bands for iterations which give good accuracy with reasonable calculation times, and allow the process to "converge on a solution". 
Because many of the equations within the Drag Racing Analyzer must be solved by iterations, there is no one exact answer. All calculations are an approximation.  Therefore, do not be alarmed if an ET improvement of .002 seconds is shown for changing in Dew Point from 67 to 66, but changing from 66 to 65 showed a .004 second improvement.  These results are basically saying lowering the Dew Point results in a very small gain in ET. 
Other Vehicle Simulation Programs 
Other vehicle simulation programs are available which do not use nearly as many inputs as the Drag Racing Analyzer uses. At first you may think these other programs are "smarter", since they do not need this additional inputs.   
However, each input the Drag Racing Analyzer uses has an effect on performance, for example Wind Direction and Wind Speed.  The other programs either are making an assumption that wind is some set value, or assume it has no effect.  By letting you adjust Wind Direction and Speed, the Drag Racing Analyzer shows you: 
• 
The change in performance due to a change in Wind conditions 

• 
Allows you greater accuracy, since you specify the wind conditions, and do not rely on the program's assumed conditions. 


Major Assumptions 
To make the Drag Racing Analyzer and the specifications which describe the vehicle containable on a personal computer, several simplifying assumptions are made which are listed below.  Other approximations and assumptions exist as identified in Section 1.3 A Word of Caution and scattered throughout this manual.  Also see Assumptions in the Index. 
• 
All vehicle components are assumed to be perfectly stiff, which means: 

• 
There is no delay in engine torque getting to the tires due to driveshaft, axle or tire "wrap up". 

• 
There is no "pitch rotation" of the vehicle (front lifting, rear dropping) due to the suspension's springs or shocks. 

• 
There is no change in the Height of CG due to "pitch rotation" or the body lifting. 

• 
Engine torque changes instantaneously with a change in throttle position.  In real engines, torque changes are delayed from .1 to .5 seconds or longer from throttle changes. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
• 
The torque converter's performance is typical of production, 3 element, hydrodynamic torque converters.  Actual converters (especially those significantly modified) can have performance characteristics that can be quite different than production converters. 

• 
Clutch holding torque does not change with time, temperature or clutch wear. 


Accuracy 
From reading the assumptions above and scattered throughout this manual, it is obvious several important aspects of vehicle performance are "glossed over".  Therefore, it is impossible to make exact predictions of what will happen to your vehicle when modifications are made. 
It should be possible to adjust the Drag Racing Analyzer to match your vehicle’s performance (see Example 4.2 and Appendix 3) to agree with your vehicle's results within .03 seconds at all points on the track. However, even after this, a modification may not be simulated completely accurately.   
For example, you specify a higher stall converter and the program predicts a 4800 RPM stall and a .1 second ET improvement.  You install the converter and obtain the 4800 RPM stall speed predicted by the Drag Racing Analyzer.  However, the converter exhibits more high speed slip (due to a poor design) than what the Drag Racing Analyzer assumes and your actual ET drops .1 second.  The program is still accurate based on its assumptions, its just that your parts do not fit its assumptions. 
.001 Sec Increments 
Increasing the time resolution  (choosing .001 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu) tells the program to do the calculations in much smaller time steps.  This does improve the mathematical accuracy somewhat.  However, it does not increase the program's overall accuracy significantly.  This is primarily due to the program’s assumptions and tolerance bands for iterations remaining the same. 
To summarize, we believe the Drag Racing Analyzer is the most precise and detailed software for predicting acceleration performance available to drag racers in this price range.  However, it's predictions can differ from your vehicle's results.  This is primarily due to the assumptions made by the program, and other points raised in this Appendix. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 2: "General Tips" 
The following "tips" will show you how to change the Drag Racing Analyzer calculations by adjusting various inputs. 
Calibrating "Tips" 
Calibration is the process of adjusting the program's inputs to produce results which closely match a certain vehicle's drag strip results.  Example 4.2 shows this process in some detail. 
Start with a file from the Vehicle Library which somewhat closely resembles your car.  Then, modify all inputs you can measure or know for certain.  Also, choose “Computer Driven-no tire spin” as the Launch Type in the Driving Specs menu to let the computer launch the car. 
There are other specifications which you probably do not know or are difficult to measure.  These uncertain specs which will have a major impact on performance include: 
"Uncertain" Specifications 
• 
Engine Power Curve specs (unless dynamometer data is available) 

• 
Clutch Specs for manual transmissions 

• 
Converter Capacity for automatic transmissions 

•
 Transmission Efficiency 

•
 Tire Growth 

•
 Drag Coefficient 

• 
Tire Traction Factor 

•
 Shift Time 


Use the guidelines in Sections 2.2 - 2.7 and Example 4.2 to estimate the "uncertain" specs.  Calculate performance and compare the computer's results to your car's actual results.  Use actual results from a "good running" day, and results you feel comfortable you could repeat under the same conditions.  Then use the "tips" below bring the computer's results in line with these actual results. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
To increase the MPH, with little effect on ET 
• 
Reduce Drag Coefficient 

• 
Increase Tire Growth 

• 
Increase Engine Power Curve specs and decrease Traction Factor 


To decrease ET and 60 ft times, with little effect on MPH 
• 
Increase Traction Factor 

• 
Adjust Converter Capacity (stall RPM) for automatic transmissions 

• 
Adjust Converter Torque Multiplication for automatic transmissions 

• 
Increase Launch RPM for manual transmissions 

• 
If Bog (engine RPM dropping too low) is a problem, try reducing Clutch Force for manual transmissions 

• 
If traction is not a problem, increase Clutch Force (or other clutch specs which produce more torque holding capability) 


To increase ET and 60 ft times, with little effect on MPH 
• 
Reduce Traction Factor 

• 
Choose Use Specs Below for the Launch Type in the Driving Specs and use the launch specs to simulate your actual launch 


To decrease ET and increase MPH, with little effect on 60 ft time 
Leave Tire Traction and other tire specs “as is” and: 
• 
Increase Engine Power Curve specs 

• 
Increase Clutch Force, lbs for manual transmissions, especially if CSlip is high in gears other than 1st gear 

• 
Increase Efficiency in the Transmission Specs menu 

• 
Decrease Shift Time in the Driving Specs menu 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
To decrease ET and decrease MPH 
• Increase Converter Capacity for automatic transmissions 
To increase ET with little effect on MPH or 60 ft time 
• 
Increase Shift Time 

• 
Decrease Shift % Throttle for manual transmissions 

• 
Choose some “less than optimum” shift RPMs in the Driving Specs menu. 

• 
Change the shape of the HP curve. 


Another Tip 
By adjusting Shift RPMs, you can simulate most any acceleration.  For example, let's say you want to know the time to accelerate from 50 MPH to 80 MPH in 3rd gear.  Adjust the 2-3 SHIFT RPM until the vehicle starts 3rd gear (after the 2-3 shift) at exactly 50 MPH.  Then adjust the 3-4 SHIFT RPM until the vehicle starts the 3-4 shift at exactly 80 MPH.  The time between start and end of 3rd gear is 3rd gear's 50-80 MPH time. 
Using Dynamometer Data for Engine Power Curve Specs 
Engine Power Curve specs are discussed in Section 2.2.  Dynamometer tests which measure engine performance can be done in different ways.  How the test is done can over-estimate or under-estimate the engine's torque and HP in the vehicle. 
The Drag Racing Analyzer works best if you enter steady state dynamometer results, with the engine equipped exactly as it will be in the vehicle.  "Equipped" means with the full exhaust and intake system, all accessories running like water pump, fan, etc.  "Steady state" means that engine RPM is stable (not changing) when the torque and HP are measured.  This is sometimes called a “step text”.   
Accelerating dynamometer tests, where the engine speed is constantly increasing (i.e. 300 RPM/sec), can under-estimate an engine's steady state performance.  You may think an accelerating test best represents an engine accelerating in a vehicle.  However, the Drag Racing Analyzer calculates the power loss due to accelerating the engine, which changes in each gear.  See "Inertia" discussion in this Appendix. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
  Figure A1  Changing Rotation Inertia 

Base Inertia 
Rotating Inertia 
The difference between stationary and rotating mass is important for a racer to understand.  Ever racer knows that the less a car weighs, the faster it can accelerate. However, not every racer knows that removing 30 lbs from the 
Reduce weight 50% Same Diameter Inertia is reduced 50% Requires only half the HP to accelerate 
Reduce Diameter 50% Same Weight Inertia is reduced 75% Requires only a quarter the HP to accelerate 
vehicle's rotating components (wheels, tires, engine flywheel) will show a larger improvement in accelerating performance than removing 30 lbs from the frame or body.    
This is because not only do you have to accelerate the tires down the quarter mile, you have to get the tires to spin faster also. The spare tire in the trunk is easier to accelerate than the same tire mounted on the axle. The tire on the axle has both mass and rotational inertia. 
Rotational inertia is a part's resistance to changing its rotational speed.  Jack up the axle and try to spin the wheel. Neglecting friction, a heavier wheel requires more force to spin than a light wheel.  In addition, if the mass is concentrated in the tire and less in the wheel, it will require even more force to spin. That is because rotational inertia depends on mass and the distance the mass is from the center of rotation.  See Figure A1. 
For this reason, rotating components with small diameters, which concentrate the mass close to the center of rotation, have much less inertia.  These components consist of the driveshaft, axle shafts, etc.  Reducing the weight of these components insignificantly reduces you rotating inertia  Rotating components with larger diameters (flywheel or torque converter, wheels/tires, somewhat in the crankshaft, damper and transmission components) contain most of the vehicle's rotating inertia.  These are the components to concentrate on when trying to reduce rotating inertia.  For example, removing 1 pound from the engine’s flywheel will have 100 up to 1000 times or more effect on the vehicle’s rotational inertia than removing 1 pound from an axle shaft. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Example 
Try some examples with the Drag Racing Analyzer with the GT5.0L.  The GT5.0L's Baseline performance is a 14.593 ET.  
Now, remove 40 lbs from the front wheels by setting Front Wheels/Tires WT = 10 instead of 50.  This modification simulates moving 40 lbs from the front wheels and placing it somewhere on the body, since we did not also reduce Vehicle Weight 40 lbs.  (If you have the Preference “Warn on Tire Weight Change” selected, the program will ask you if you want to change the vehicle weight by 80 lbs when you leave the Wheels/Tires menu.  Answer No for now.) Calculate performance an we get an ET of 14.512.  Nearly a one tenth improvement just by moving weight around on the vehicle (not moving it to change traction). 
Now reduce the Vehicle Weight 80 lbs to 3120.  This simulates removing 40 lbs from each front wheel & tire and not placing it on the vehicle.  This GT5.0L's ET is now down to 14.441. 
Condition  Analyzer Modification  ET  MPH  
Baseline  No change to GT5.0L  14.593  94.97  
Remove 40 lbs from each front wheel/tire and place the weight on the body  Front Wheel/Tire Weight = 10  14.512  95.34  
Remove 40 lbs from each front wheel/tire (vehicle weight lightens up 80 lbs)  Front Wheel/Tire Weight = 10 Vehicle Weight = 3120  14.512  95.34  

(To be exact about removing 40 lbs from each front wheel/tire, the GT5.0L's % Wt on Rear Tires would have increased to 41% from the GT5.0L's original 40% Weight on the Rear.) 
Engine Inertia 
Engine inertia is more complicated than other rotating inertia on the vehicle.  It is not always best to reduce engine inertia to improve acceleration.   
That is because the engine is not "geared" directly to the road.  Engine RPM does not have to change at the same rate, or even in the same direction as vehicle speed.  When the vehicle's speed is zero, the engine could be spinning at 10,000 RPM.  Release the clutch and the engine RPM drops as the vehicle speeds up. 
Because of this difference, you can use the engine's rotating inertia to help accelerate the car.  For example, an engine's flywheel spinning a 10,000 RPM stores tremendous energy.  This energy can be used to get the vehicle accelerating once you drop the clutch.  The flywheel also releases stored energy during shifts, when engine RPM drops from the high speed of the previous gear to the lower speed in the next gear.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
The Drag Racing Analyzer estimates the rotational inertia of the engine and clutch/flywheel or converter and transmission parts based on: 
• 
Displacement in the Engine Specs menu (the higher the displacement, the higher the inertia) 

• 
Clutch Specs like # disks, diameter, clutch force (the higher these specs, the higher the inertia) 

• 
Converter Capacity (the higher the capacity, the lower the inertia because this usually means a smaller diameter converter) 


Tips on Simulating Modifications 
The previous "inertia" examples point out an error most users will make.  When you make a modification, always think of how it could affect each specification.  The example of removing 40 lbs from the front wheels not only affected Front Wheels/Tires WT, but also Vehicle Weight and % Wt on Rear Tires. Below is a list of common modifications and the specs they may affect. 
Engine Modifications 
Engine modifications can change all Engine Power Curve specs and Displacement. If the engine is naturally aspirated (not supercharged, turbocharged or uses nitrous oxide) and you increase the HP, generally the RPM where the HP will peak will increase also.  Vehicle Weight and % Wt on Rear Tires may also change if you change to aluminum components (less weight) or add a supercharger (more weight), etc. 
Adding, Removing or Shifting Weight 
• 
Vehicle Weight 

• 
% Wt on Rear Tires 

• 
Front & Rear Wheels/Tires Weight 


Changing vehicle height 
• 
Height of CG 

• 
Frontal Area, sq ft 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Changing wheels and tires 
• 
All the Wheels/Tires Specs 

• 
Vehicle Weight, lbs 

• 
% Wt on Rear Tires 

• 
Track Width 

• 
Frontal Area, sq ft 


Changing torque converter 
• 
Converter Capacity 

• 
Conv Tq Multiplication 

• 
Vehicle Weight 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 3: New Features in Version 3.2 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.2: 
• 
Program is now a 32 bit version, fully compatible with newer operating systems, starting with Windows, 95, then 98, Me, XP, and 2000. This also allows you to use much longer, more descriptive file names for saving vehicles, throttle stop data and dial in data. It is also more compatible with newer printers. 

• 
The program is now designed for 600 x 800 or higher resolution screens. 

• 
There is now a separate “Examples” folder for example vehicle files provided by Performance Trends. New vehicles which you save will be saved to a separate folder of Your Saved Vehicles. 

• 
A new Preference lets you remove the Performance Trends Example Vehicles from Your Saved Vehicles if you have updated from Version 3.0. 

• 
There are now File commands to save a vehicle file to a floppy disk, or open a vehicle file from a floppy disk.  This makes it easy to copy a vehicle file from one computer to another. 

• 
You can now choose to list vehicle, dial in and throttle stop files alphabetically (as normally done) or by saved date, with the most recently saved files listed first. This should make it easier to find recent files more quickly. 

• 
You can now choose to only list vehicle files which have certain words or phrases in their names, like just “Chev” files, “Import” files or “Race” files. This should make it much easier for you to find example vehicles or your vehicles in a long list. 

• 
The user’s manual is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Display User’s Manual. The manual is in a high quality PDF format  

• 
The Performance Trends website is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Performance Trends on the Web.  

• 
A Print button and Windows Print Setup button (or menu option) have been added to many screens to let you print these individual screens.   

• 
An Optimize button has been added at the top of the Main Screen, which lets you instantly find the best torque converter (if transmission is an automatic) or final drive (rear axle) ratio for quickest ET. 

• 
Two new calculation menus have been added, one to convert engine size from CCs or Liters to cubic inches, and the other is to estimate the vehicle weight of your car based on some popular car models. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
• 
The recent results section of the results screen now includes 60 ft time and the improvement for the current and previous run. 

• 
A summary Time Slip, similar to what you get at the drag strip, is available in the results screen for the current results, and available for any of the 25 runs in the history log. 

• 
Commands in the History Log have been updated and streamlined.  Now when you click on a row in the History Log, you are now presented with 4 command options, Open, Rename, Help or Time Slip. 

• 
The Dial In and Throttle Stop screens have a new spec of "safety margin", which the program uses to give you a margin of error to keep you from breaking out. 

• 
The Throttle Stop Predictions can now be based on just one previous run, and an Adjustment Factor from a previous run.  This Adjustment Factor is obtained by doing a calibration run at some previous time.  See the detailed explanation later in this section for this more convenient method of predicting throttle stops. 

• 
The program will now “Auto Link” to our upcoming Engine Analyzers, versions 3.2.  Auto Linking means the Engine Analyzer screen will show the resulting MPH and ET from an engine change, running the Drag Racing Analyzer program completely in the background. 

• 
A new Preference lets you obtain instant updates of ET, MPH and 60 ft times from every change you make in the vehicle specs screens.  This can be a great time saver, especially on newer, faster computers. 

• 
Several new Example Vehicle Files have been added, to make building your vehicle easier. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
New Throttle Stop Options: 
In Version 3.2, there are 2 ways to predict Throttle Stops: 
1. 
Based on 2 previous runs obtained during time trials or “test and tune runs”.  This is the only method that was available in version 3.0, is somewhat more accurate but much less convenient. 

2. 
Based on 1 run and the "Adjustment Factor" determined from some set of 2 runs you ran some previous time. This method has been added in Version 3.2 and is much more convenient. 


Click on Options at the top of the Throttle Stop screen, and then select which method you want to use. 
To determine the correct Adjustment Factor for one run, you must first open a throttle stop file you have run in the past which has 2 runs.  Then click on the "Clc" button by the Predicted Throttle Stop setting or click on "Update Prediction".  When there is a Predicted Throttle Stop displayed, you will also notice an “Adj Factor” or Adjustment Factor displayed under Run 2.   
Now you can click on Options and choose “Use One Previous Throttle Stop Run”.  The screen will change, and the “Adj Factor” will be loaded in.  You could also simply type in a adjustment factor from a previous set of runs.  Also enter the weather, TS setting, ET and 60 ft for just one previous run (Run #2).  Now the program is ready to predict a new Throttle Stop setting from new weather conditions you enter for Predicted Run.  Click on the “Clc” button by the Throttle Stop output, or the Update Calculation menu item for the Throttle Stop setting you should run. 
For example, you have obtained an “Adj Factor” of 25.234 based on 2 previous runs, perhaps 2 months ago.  You come to a new event and make a time trial pass with certain weather conditions, throttle stop setting and ET.  This first time trial should be your attempt to run very close to the Index.  You enter these conditions into the program as Run 2.  Now, for your Round 1 run, you enter the current weather conditions, Safety Margin, and method to estimate the 60 ft time for the Predicted Run and click on the “Clc” button to obtain the correct Throttle Stop setting.  This Throttle Stop setting will be nearly as accurate as if you had made 2 runs with very different throttle stop settings as described in the manual in Example 4.3. 
You will also notice a new input called “Safety Margin”.  For example, if you say your index is 9.90, but you want the program to predict what setting is necessary to run a 9.93 (a .03 second safety margin), you should enter 9.90 as the Index and .03 as the Safety Margin.  Safety Margin is also available in the Dial In screen and works in a similar way. 
What is “Adj Factor”? 
The Adjustment Factor is a measure of how much affect your throttle stop has on your vehicle’s ET.  It is measured by making 2 different runs with 2 very different throttle stop settings, say one where the throttle stop is on for .5 seconds, and another where the stop is on for 2.5 seconds.  These are not runs where you will try to run your index, and are best run during a “test and tune” session.  Your objective is 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
to produce 2 very different ETs, hopefully .300 to .600 seconds different than each other.  These 2 runs should be done with no other vehicle changes, and ideally with very little difference in the weather conditions. Take the weather conditions and results for these 2 runs and load them into the Throttle Stop screen as Run 1 and Run 2.  Put in most any conditions for the Predicted Run and click on the “Clc” button to update the Throttle Stop Prediction and you will be given the “Adj Factor” for Run 1 and Run 2. 
This “Adj Factor” can now be used for predicting Throttle Stop settings.  If you make significant changes to the vehicle, throttle stop settings or the time the throttle stop comes on (say it was 1.5 seconds into the run, now it is 2.5 seconds into the run), you must obtain a new “Adj Factor” based on 2 runs with very different throttle stop settings with this new change.  

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 





Appendix 4: New Features in Version 3.4 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.4: 
• 
Allows for a graphics file to be included with your vehicle data.  This graphics file can be printed separately or with your printouts.  At this time, only JPG files can be added. 

• 
More Vista and Windows 7 compatible. 

• 
Program now better remembers Printer Changes and Printer Type.   

• 
Better at finding more and newer versions of Acrobat and Reader Preferences now has a global switch turn off Intro Help Tips 

• 
InstantCalc Results (ET & MPH for each modification you make as they are made by the user) are now shown on Main screen in Blue, if selected in Preferences.  Prior to v3.4, InstantCalc results were only displayed in the individual Component screens. 

• 
Did fine tuning of Tire Diameter and Tire Tread Width calculations to better match the new, modern P Metric tires with very tall and wide wheels.   

• 
New Preference lets you select to do new "Fine Tuned" method for calculations for P metric tire sizes on not.   

• 
Program now better finds Engine Analyzer programs to link up with. 

• 
Added some more example transmissions. 

• 
Fixed a minor bug where a file size would never shrink if you changed to a smaller size JPG pic file. 

• 
Added many new example vehicle files with pictures. 

• 
Screen for saving files now has much larger field for entering long names. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A8 Including a Graphics File with the Vehicle File 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 




Appendix 5: New Features in Version 3.4 B 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.4 B: 
• 
Program has several new Example vehicle files, including an all electric Tesla, most with picture files.  Fig A12. 

• 
Program now allows for 4 more transmission ratios so you can specify up to 10 speed transmissions, either manual or automatic in Transmission Specs. Fig A13. 

• 
You can now specify an automatic torque converter to lock up at some particular gear ratio.  At that gear ratio and all higher gears, the converter is assumed to remain locked.  Fig A13. 

• 
Program now also has 4 more gear shift RPMs in Driving Specs screen.  Fig A14 

• 
Added a setting for number of gears in the transmission, and program now hides gear ratios not needed. This makes it more clear how the program is using transmission gears.  Prior to v3.4B, the program just looked for a blank or zero input for a ratio to know that gear was not being used. Fig A13 

• 
Now, if the program finds that converter is too loose for a combination User Selected shift RPMs and the particular power curve, the program now switches to Computer Picked Shift RPMs so the calculations can continue. 

• 
The program now has greatly enhanced graphing options, similar to our larger programs.  You can overlay more runs, zoom in, specify grid layout, have more printout and labeling options, and much more.  Figs A15 through A27. 

• 
Now when you delete a file, it now goes to the Recycle Bin so you can 'recover it later if you need to.  Fig A29 and Fig A30. 

• 
The program now has an “'Advanced” button for saving or opening data files or external drives or other folders on your computer.  Fig A28 

• 
The program now better checks for some values for producing errors and fixes the problems so the calculations can continue, without producing error messages. 

• 
Program now has a “Compress Picture File” as a File option for pictures, which explains how to compress picture files with 3rd party program. 

• 
Program now better handles direct drive transmission and 1 gear transmissions.   

• 
You can now retrieve files from History Log. 

• 
Program now better deals with external drives for saving and opening files, and no longer calls them "Floppy Disks". 

• 
Program now saves more of the graph settings for printing and comments. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 





Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph button or the Graph name in the menu bar at the top of the tabular results screen shown in Figure 3.2, Chapter 3.  Figure A15 below shows a typical graph and descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 
Figure A15 Basic Graph Screen Items 
Command buttons perform action as pictured with 1 click of mouse. Menu bar provides for several graph commands and options. Commands to the right of the “|” provide a short cut to commonly used commands. 
Graph Title: change by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/Legend. 
‘Short cut’ commands appear to the right of this bar. Name of current Engine File 

Graph Legend, which describes the data graphed. This includes Name of test results, Type of Data. Names in the Legend can be changed by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/ Legend. 
Horizontal X axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily 
changed as described in this section. Grid lines. The style or elimination of grid lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Grid Style. 
Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can be 
changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 
Vertical Y axis, the scaling of which can be changed as described in this section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
There are several types of data which can be graphed, including: 
• 
Engine RPM 

• 
MPH, vehicle speed in miles per hour. 

• 
Clutch or torque converter RPM. 

• 
Feet is the distance down the track. 

• 
Accel Gs is acceleration rate in Gs. 

• 
Engine HP is the amount of HP being delivered to the clutch converter.  This is affected by Driving Specs, engine RPM, weather conditions, and the shape of the power curve. 

• 
Throttle, % is the amount the throttle is opened, where 100% mean wide open throttle or full power.  Throttle is affected by Driving Specs and can be limited to prevent tire spin. 

• 
Clutch or Converter RPM is the input to the transmission. 

• 
Tire Slip, % is the amount the tires are slipping.  Even though tires have not broken loose, they can still be slipping up to 10-15%. 

• 
Clutch or Converter Slip, % is the difference between Clutch or Torque Converter RPM and Engine RPM, expressed as a percent. If the clutch or converter are locked, this will be 0%. 



There are basically 2 types of graphs you can produce: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results for the data displayed in the Test Results screen, for the current Vehicle specs and conditions, the last run you made. 

• 
Test results from the History Log. The History Log is a list of 25 tests, some of which you have specified you want saved long term, some of which are simply the last tests you have run.  


The History Log is explained in some detail in Section 3.5 starting on page 105.  This section will explain how to graph test results for tests in the History Log. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 



Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 

• 
Miscellaneous Format Options to change the appearance of the graph. 


These are discussed in this next section. 
Printing 
Figure A18 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  It also shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup. 

Figure A18 Printing Graphs 
Clicking on the Printer button is the same as clicking on File and then Print. 
Click on File to display the 
two print menu options 
Click here to print the graph. 
Click here to change the printer or printer driver, page orientation, etc. as shown below. 

Windows standard Printer Setup menu 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places. See Figure A19 for explaining the use of the cursor. 


Figure A19 Cursor Features and Commands Click here to turn Cursor On 
Click here to turn Cursor Off 
Cursor line, 
usually pink Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or 
or green, right. Hold down the <shift key> while clicking 
depending on these buttons and the cursor moves farther. 
background You can also enable the cursor by clicking on l View, then Turn Cursor On. 

The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 
The X value of the cursor is shown 
here, in this case the 2.901 seconds. 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph line. This also provides a quick way to move the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Changing titles and legend names 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure A20 which will allow you to do this. 
Figure A20 Menu to Edit Title and Legend 
This is the list of Standard names the program uses unless you click on the Use New Titles button below. Select (click on) a Standard name you want to change. The Standard Name appears in the edit box, along with the current New name if there is one. Once you have selected a name from this list (that row will be highlighted) it is easier to use the up and down arrow keys to select the next item to edit than clicking the item with the mouse. 
This is the list of New names the program will use if you click on Use New Titles.  If a title in the List of New Names is blank, the program will use the Standard name. 
Standard name from 
row selected. 
New name for you to edit. Other options include clicking on the Copy Std Name to New or Blank Out New Name buttons. 
Click here to close this menu and use the New names you have entered. Where New names have been left blank, the Standard name will be used. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph.  The Drag Racing Analyzer has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures A21 and A22. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A22 Menu to Specify Graph Axes Scales 
This menu can be obtained 2 ways. You can click on View in the menu bar then Specify Scales (axes), or click on the Set Scales button, the right most button on the screen.  See Figure A21. 

The current scale limits are loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. 
Click on OK to have the graph redrawn to these new scale limits . 
These buttons determine if these scales are used, or graph is “auto-scaled”. 
Format Options 
Click on the Format menu item to be presented with several options which will be briefly discussed here. 
Line Style 
Click on Line Style to change the thickness of the graph lines. 
Titles and Labels 
Click on Titles and Labels to bring up option screen shown in Figure A18.  See choices shown in Figure A22. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Edit Printed Comments 
Click on Edit Printed Comments for the screen shown in Figure A23.  These settings only affect printouts. 
Grid Style 
Click on Grid Style to change or omit the drawing of grid lines on the graph. 
Back Color 
Click on Back Color to change the background color of the graph from white, black or gray.  Different Back Colors can make certain line colors stand out better, so experiment with your particular computer display and Line Style (thickness). 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

4 wheel drive, 28 
60 foot time, 7, 13, 75, 77, 80, 81, 82, 85, 106, 129, 134, 136, 140, 141, 142 
60 foot, sec, 80, 81, 85 
Accel Gs, 1, 58, 97, 144, 174 
Acceleration, 1, 29, 36, 37, 57, 58, 63, 143, 144, 146, 149, 151, 174 
Advanced Saving/Opening Files, 169 
Aerodynamics, 32, 33, 120, 147, 148 
Air Temperature, 51, 79, 84, 120, 123 
All Wheel Drive, 24, 28 
Altimeter, 1, 50, 51, 52, 80, 84, 140 
Analysis Report, 5, 1, 91, 93, 94 
Aspect Ratio, 69 
Assumptions, 6, 3, 18, 28, 30, 31, 35, 41, 52, 58, 62, 136, 142, 145, 146 
Axle Ratio, 6, 108, 114, 117 
Back Color, Graph, 181 
Background Color, 98 
Barometer, 1, 50, 51, 52, 79, 84, 106, 120, 123, 134, 140 
Baseline, 1, 8, 95, 96, 98, 108, 116, 151 
Baselinexe "Baseline" is a Selected Run, 98 
Beginner, 13, 39 
Body & Axle, 5, 11, 26, 34, 35, 63, 65, 66, 67, 88, 113, 120, 122, 125, 126 
Bog (Engine), 39, 116 
Bonneville, 53, 54, 106 
C RPM, 58 
C Slip, 58 
Calculate Performance, 5, 6, 9, 49, 55, 71, 72, 77, 82, 98, 108, 109, 111, 114, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123 
Calculate Performance Conditions, 5, 6, 8, 9, 49, 71, 72, 109, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123 
Calculation Menu, 5, 9, 17, 18, 60, 61, 71, 72, 119, 121, 122, 125, 154 
Index 
Calculation Menus, 5, 9, 17, 18, 60, 61, 71, 72, 119, 121, 122, 125 
CG, 29 
Chain, 27, 65, 66 
Circumference, 36, 68, 69 
Clc button, 9, 16, 17, 18, 27, 29, 31, 36, 37, 42, 51, 60, 61, 62, 65, 70, 71, 72, 77, 81, 82, 86, 121, 123, 125, 137, 141 
Clc Button, 9, 16, 17, 18, 27, 29, 31, 36, 37, 42, 51, 60, 61, 62, 65, 70, 71, 72, 77, 81, 82, 86, 121, 123, 125, 137, 141 
Clutch Diameter, 22 
Clutch Force, 22, 148 
Clutch Material, 23 
Clutch or Converter and Engine RPM, 97, 115 
Clutch/Converter, 22, 24, 124 
Comments, 5, 8, 79, 84, 104, 130, 140, 169 
Compress Picture File, 169 
Computer Driven (Launch), 39, 42, 45, 46, 111, 127, 147 
Construction (Tire), 36, 37, 74, 117, 120 
Conv Tq Multiplication, 24, 58, 116, 118, 124, 148, 153 
Converter, 1, 2, 16, 21, 22, 23, 24, 40, 41, 45, 46, 47, 58, 59, 74, 75, 97, 111, 112, 120, 122, 124, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 152, 153, 154, 169, 174 
Converter Capacity, 2, 23, 40, 45, 46, 74, 124, 147, 148, 149, 152, 153 
Converter lock up, 27, 169 
Corr. Factor, 17 
Current Run, 56, 96 
Cursor, Graph, 176, 177 
Data to Graph, 97 
Density Altitude, 1, 106 
Dew Point, 1, 9, 17, 18, 51, 71, 72, 73, 79, 84, 120, 121, 123, 144 
Dial In, 5, 6, 1, 13, 71, 72, 82, 83, 84, 86, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 141, 155, 158 
Diff Lock Eff, 27, 125 
Differential, 27, 65 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Disabled, 16, 22, 28, 30, 31, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 50, 51, 61, 121, 123, 124, 127, 140 
Displacement, 16, 63, 120, 121, 152 
Distance, 1, 29, 30, 35, 36, 37, 54, 56, 57, 58, 67, 69, 75, 106, 109, 150, 174 
Distance of Race, 75 
Dnsy Alt, 1, 106 
Drag Coefficient, 32, 33, 120, 147, 148 
Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, 1 
Drag Slicks, 36, 37, 117, 120, 126 
Drag Strip, 3, 7, 53, 56, 57, 111, 113, 132, 134, 138, 147, 155 
Driveline Layout, 28, 34, 35 
Driving Specs, 5, 38, 41, 42, 70, 111, 117, 120, 127, 128, 147, 148, 149, 169, 174 
Dry Bulb, 1, 9, 51, 71, 72, 73, 120, 123 
Dry Density Altitude, 1, 52, 106 
Dry Dnsy Alt, 1, 106 
Dynamometer, 18 
Dynamometers, 16, 17, 62, 121, 147, 149 
Edit Printed Comments, Graph, 181 
Efficiency, 24, 28, 36, 147, 148 
Eighth Mile MPH, 62, 63, 121 
El Mirage, 53, 54, 106 
Engine, 4, 5, 1, 6, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 27, 29, 32, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 74, 76, 90, 94, 97, 100, 103, 109, 111, 112, 113, 116, 119, 120, 121, 122, 124, 129, 136, 142, 143, 145, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 154, 155, 164, 174 
Engine Analyzer, 1, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 155, 164 
Engine Cubic Inches, 60, 61, 63 
Engine Graph, 14 
Engine RPM, 1, 23, 39, 40, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 57, 58, 97, 111, 112, 116, 129, 148, 149, 151, 
EngRPM, 58 
Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time, 80, 81, 85, 136, 141 
ET Timer, 54, 57 
ET, sec, 80, 85 
Example, 5, 6, 1, 5, 9, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 34, 35, 37, 39, 40, 
41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 50, 51, 52, 57, 60, 61, 67, 71, 74, 75, 77, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 93, 100, 105, 107, 108, 113, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 124, 125, 126, 131, 132, 134, 135, 136, 138, 140, 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150, 151, 152, 154, 155, 158, 164, 169 
Examples, 6, 24, 28, 34, 37, 39, 41, 43, 44, 46, 47, 87, 88, 90, 107, 124, 126, 148, 154 
External Drives, 169 
Feet, 57, 58, 97, 106, 111, 174 
File, 2, 5, 79, 84, 100, 101, 108, 131, 132, 133, 138, 154, 169 
Final Drive Ratio, 27, 60, 65, 114, 117, 120 
Finish, 1, 56, 62, 75, 76 
Finish Engine RPM, 76 
Finish MPH, 75, 76 
Finish Trans Gear #, 76 
Flywheel, 16, 150, 151, 152 
Front Wheel Drive, 28, 34, 35 
Front Wheel/Tire, 34, 126, 151 
Frontal Area, 31, 67, 89, 152, 153 
Frt Roll Stfns, 28, 30, 31 
Full Power Curve, 14, 15, 16, 18, 62 
Gear Ratio, 25 
Graph, 5, 1, 6, 8, 14, 18, 43, 44, 46, 47, 95, 96, 97, 98, 111, 112, 113, 116, 118, 169, 173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181 
Graph Back Color, 181 
Graph cursor, 176, 177 
Graph Grid Style, 181 
Graphxe "Graphs" Labels, 96 
Graph Legend, 176, 178 
Graphxe "Graphs" with Baseline, 98 
Graphxe "Graphs" without Baseline, 98 
Graph, Cursor, 176, 177 
Graph, Edit Printed Comments, 181 
Graph, Grid Style, 169, 181 
Graph, Line Style, 180, 181 
Graphs, 96, 98 
Grid Style, Graph, 169, 181 
Height of CG, 29, 145, 152 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
History, 5, 1, 54, 105, 106, 108, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 155, 169, 174, 175 
Humidity, 1, 5, 17, 18, 51, 52, 71, 72, 73, 106, 
Improvement, 7, 56, 106 
Improvement Summary, 56 
Imprvmnt, 106 
Include Vehicle Comments, 104 
Include Vehicle Specs, 103 
Index, 6, 77, 80, 81, 86, 138, 140, 142, 145, 158, 189 
Index, sec, 81 
Inertia, 13, 16, 34, 47, 149, 150, 151, 152 
Install, 4, 70, 154, 176 
Know Dew Point?, 72 Know Relative Humidity?, 71 
Last Run, 56 
Launch, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 59, 75, 111, 113, 116, 117, 127, 147, 148 
Launch % Clutch, 40, 41, 44 
Launch % Throttle, 40, 41, 44, 46, 59 
Launch RPM, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 117, 148 
Launch Time, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 
Legend, graph, 176, 178 
Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs, 22, 23, 74 
Letter Tire Size, 69 
Line Style, Graph, 180, 181 
Load from Eng. Anlzr., 18, 19 
Main Menu, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 13, 19, 37, 49, 56, 70, 74, 77, 82, 100, 108, 109, 113, 114, 119, 121, 123, 125, 127, 129, 130, 132, 138 
Match Vehicle Performance, 5, 1, 17, 37, 70, 74, 75, 119, 129, 130, 131 
Method of Describing Power Curve, 16, 17, 121 
Method of Recording Weather Data, 50, 71, 72, 80, 85, 120, 140 
Metric Tire Size, 69 
Motorcycle, 28, 31, 32, 35 
MPH, 1, 7, 23, 45, 53, 56, 57, 58, 61, 62, 75, 77, 82, 97, 106, 108, 111, 114, 119, 120, 121, 
123, 125, 127, 129, 132, 134, 138, 141, 143, 
148, 149, 151, 155, 164, 174 
Open, 1, 5, 23, 32, 79, 84, 99, 100, 108, 119, 132, 138, 155 
Optimum, 1, 33, 42, 117, 127, 143, 149 
Outside Air Temp, 71, 72 
Outside Rel Humidity, 71 
Peak Horsepower, 16, 17, 60, 61, 62, 121, 129 
Peak HP Only, 16, 17 
Peak Torque, 16, 17, 61, 62 
Peak Torque and HP Only, 16 
PERFTRNS.PTI, 102, 108 
Pick An Example, 88 
Plot Lines, 97 
Preferences, 5, 13, 56, 57, 77, 82, 108, 119, 132, 137, 142, 146, 164 
Print, 5, 1, 2, 8, 18, 91, 97, 98, 103, 104, 154, 164, 169, 176, 178 
Print Now, 97 
Prvs Run Always Changes to Baseline, 98 
Quarter Mile MPH, 61, 63, 121, 143 
Radius, 36, 37, 69 
Rating Type (Tire), 68 
Rear Axle Ratio, 27, 60, 65, 113, 114, 117, 120 
Rear Track Width, 28, 30, 67, 126 
Recycle Bin, 169 
Registered Owner, 3, 4 
Relative Humidity, 1, 50, 51, 71, 72, 79, 84, 123, 134, 140, 141 
Remind on Tire Wt Change, 13 
Request Report Comment, 104 
Rolling Radius, 35, 36, 68, 69 
Rollout, 43, 44, 47, 54, 56, 57, 109, 123 
Roof Height, 67 
RPM at Peak HP, 17, 61 
RPM at Peak Torque, 17, 61, 62 
Safety, 4, 3, 8, 27, 29, 81, 82, 86, 91, 93, 134, 135, 140, 142, 155, 158 
Save, 1, 5, 19, 79, 84, 90, 100, 131 
Save As, 79, 84 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Sec Increments, 13, 108, 118, 119, 132, 137, 142, 146 
Select Current Run as Baseline, 98 
Setup, 4, 70, 154, 176 
Shift, 1, 17, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 57, 61, 64, 109, 116, 117, 120, 122, 127, 131, 147, 148, 149, 169 
Shift % Throttle, 41, 42, 44, 59, 117, 149 
Shift RPM, 17, 41, 42, 44, 46, 64, 70, 109, 120, 127, 149, 169 
Shift RPMs, 17, 41, 42, 44, 46, 64, 70, 109, 120, 127, 149, 169 
Shift Time, 41, 42, 44, 47, 117, 127, 147, 148, 149 
Slicks, 36, 37, 117, 120, 126 
Stall RPM, 1, 23, 40, 45, 46, 75, 120, 124, 148 
Stall RPM at Launch, 75 
Suspension, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 36, 70, 145 
T Slip, 58 
T/S Start Time, 81, 140 
Tech Help, 3 
Thick Lines, 14 
Thin Lines, 14 
Throttle Stop, 5, 6, 1, 52, 71, 72, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 154, 155, 158, 159 
Throttle Stop Prediction, 5, 77, 142, 155, 159 
Tire Diameter, 35, 36, 60, 68, 69, 74, 76, 117, 120, 164 
Tire Growth, 36, 37, 74, 147, 148 
Torque Converter lock up, 27, 169 
Total Vehicle Weight, 29, 66 
TqMult, 58 
Track Length, 53, 56 
Track Weather, 50, 124, 138 
Traction, 2, 27, 29, 30, 31, 33, 36, 37, 39, 70, 74, 80, 82, 85, 111, 116, 118, 120, 136, 143, 147, 148, 151 
Traction Factor, 2, 36, 37, 70, 74, 120, 147, 148 
Trans Brake, 23, 45, 75, 77, 140 
Transmission, 5, 1, 6, 16, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 57, 65, 66, 75, 76, 90, 103, 120, 124, 125, 147, 148, 149, 150, 152, 154, 164, 169, 174 
Trap Speed, 7, 53, 56, 111 
Tread, 35, 36, 68, 69, 117, 120, 164 
Tread Width, 36, 68, 117, 120, 164 
Vehicle Library, 5, 6, 9, 91, 99, 100, 110, 119, 131, 132, 138, 147 
Vehicle Weight, 26, 60, 61, 63, 66, 120, 121, 122, 143, 151, 152, 153 
Version 3, 6, 1, 104, 132, 135, 138, 142, 154, 158, 164, 169 
Vol Eff, 61, 62, 63, 121 
Weather, 1, 9, 17, 23, 50, 51, 52, 71, 73, 77, 79, 80, 82, 84, 104, 106, 109, 119, 121, 122, 132, 134, 136, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142, 158, 159, 174 
Weather Stations, 50, 52 
Weight on 1 Axle, 67, 125 
Wet Bulb, 71, 72, 73, 121 
Wheel Rim Diameter, 69 
Wheel/Tire, 34, 35, 70, 117, 126, 127 
Wheelbase, 30, 120, 126 
Wheels & Tires Wt, 35 
Which Axle?, 67 
Wind, 53, 121, 123, 134, 140, 145 
Wind Direction, 53, 121, 145 
Wind Speed, 53, 121, 123, 145 
Windows, 1, 2, 18, 19, 20, 32, 102, 108, 154, 164, 176 
Zoom, 169 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 








(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 5: New Features in Version 3.4 B 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.4 B: 
• 
Program has several new Example vehicle files, including an all electric Tesla, most with picture files.  Fig A12. 

• 
Program now allows for 4 more trans ratios so you can specify up to 10 speed transmissions, either manual or automatic in Transmission Specs. Fig A13. 

• 
You can now specify an automatic torque converter to lock up at some particular gear ratio.  At that gear ratio and all higher gears, the converter is assumed to remain locked.  Fig A13. 

• 
Program now also has 4 more gear shift RPMs in Driving Specs screen.  Fig A14 

• 
Added a setting for number of gears in the transmission, and program now hides gear ratios not needed. This makes it more clear how the program is using transmission gears.  Prior to v3.4B, the program just looked for a blank or zero input for a ratio to know that gear was not being used.  Fig A13 

• 
Now, if the program finds that converter is too loose for a combination User Selected shift RPMs and the particular power curve, the program now switches to Computer Picked Shift RPMs so the calculations can continue. 

• 
The program now has greatly enhanced graphing options, similar to our larger programs.  You can overlay more runs, zoom in, specify grid layout, have more printout and labeling options, and much more.  Figs A15 through A27. 

• 
Now when you delete a file, it now goes to the Recycle Bin so you can 'recover it later if you need to.  Fig A29 and Fig A30. 

• 
The program now has an “'Advanced” button for saving or opening data files or external drives or other folders on your computer.  Fig A28 

• 
The program now better checks for some values for producing errors and fixes the problems so the calculations can continue, without producing error messages. 

• 
Program now has a “Compress Picture File” as a File option for pictures, which explains how to compress picture files with 3rd party program. 

• 
Program now better handles direct drive transmission and 1 gear transmissions.   

• 
You can now retrieve files from History Log. 

• 
Program now better deals with external drives for saving and opening files, and no longer calls them "Floppy Disks". 

• 
Program now saves more of the graph settings for printing and comments. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph button or the Graph name in the menu bar at the top of the tabular results screen shown in Figure 3.2, Chapter 3.  Figure A15 below shows a typical graph and descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 
Figure A15 Basic Graph Screen Items 
Command buttons perform action as pictured with 1 click of mouse. Menu bar provides for several graph commands and options. Commands to the right of the “|” provide a short cut to commonly used commands. 
Graph Title: change by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/Legend. 
‘Short cut’ commands appear to the right of this bar. Name of current Engine File 

Graph Legend, which describes the data graphed. This includes Name of test results, Type of Data. Names in the Legend can be changed by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/ Legend. 

Horizontal X axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily 

changed as described in this section. Grid lines. The style or elimination of grid lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Grid Style. 
Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can be 
changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 
Vertical Y axis, the scaling of which can be changed as described in this section. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 







There are several types of data which can be graphed, including: 
• 
Engine RPM 

• 
MPH, vehicle speed in miles per hour. 

• 
Clutch or torque converter RPM. 

• 
Feet is the distance down the track. 

• 
Accel Gs is acceleration rate in Gs. 

• 
Engine HP is the amount of HP being delivered to the clutch converter.  This is affected by Driving Specs, engine RPM, weather conditions, and the shape of the power curve. 

• 
Throttle, % is the amount the throttle is opened, where 100% mean wide open throttle or full power.  Throttle is affected by Driving Specs and can be limited to prevent tire spin. 

• 
Clutch or Converter RPM is the input to the transmission. 

• 
Tire Slip, % is the amount the tires are slipping.  Even though tires have not broken loose, they can still be slipping up to 10-15%. 

• 
Clutch or Converter Slip, % is the difference between Clutch or Torque Converter RPM and Engine RPM, expressed as a percent. If the clutch or converter are locked, this will be 0%. 



There are basically 2 types of graphs you can produce: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results for the data displayed in the Test Results screen, for the current Vehicle specs and conditions, the last run you made. 

• 
Test results from the History Log. The History Log is a list of 25 tests, some of which you have specified you want saved long term, some of which are simply the last tests you have run.  


The History Log is explained in some detail in Section 3.5 starting on page 105.  This section will explain how to graph test results for tests in the History Log. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A17 History Log for Graphing 

Click on the History menu item to display the History Log shown below. 
Click Graph Options, then Graph Single Test 
Click on ‘Graph These Tests’ to close the History Log and graph the tests identified by the menu option you pick. 
Click and drag slide bar to display entire History Log. Some tests marked Yes may be at the bottom of the Log and not be visible now. 
Click in this column to show  Yes or remove Yes.  Tests marked Yes will be graphed. 
This column shows name program will display in graph Legend for this test. Click on name to change it. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 

• 
Miscellaneous Format Options to change the appearance of the graph. 


These are discussed in this next section. 
Printing 
Figure A18 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  It also shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup. 
Figure A18 Printing Graphs 
Clicking on the Printer button is the same as clicking on File and then Print. 

Click on File to display the two print menu options 
Click here to print the graph. 
Click here to change the printer or printer driver, page orientation, etc. as shown below. 

Windows standard Printer Setup menu 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places. See Figure A19 for explaining the use of the cursor. 


Figure A19 Cursor Features and Commands Click here to turn Cursor On 
Click here to turn Cursor Off 
Cursor line, 
usually pink Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or 
or green, right. Hold down the <shift key> while clicking 
depending on these buttons and the cursor moves farther. 
background You can also enable the cursor by clicking on l View, then Turn Cursor On. 

The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 
The X value of the cursor is shown 
here, in this case the 2.901 seconds. 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph line. This also provides a quick way to move the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Changing titles and legend names 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure A20 which will allow you to do this. 
Figure A20 Menu to Edit Title and Legend 
This is the list of Standard names the program uses unless you click on the Use New Titles button below. Select (click on) a Standard name you want to change. The Standard Name appears in the edit box, along with the current New name if there is one. Once you have selected a name from this list (that row will be highlighted) it is easier to use the up and down arrow keys to select the next item to edit than clicking the item with the mouse. 
This is the list of New names the program will use if you click on Use New Titles.  If a title in the List of New Names is blank, the program will use the Standard name. 

Standard name from 
row selected. 
New name for you to edit. Other options include clicking on the Copy Std Name to New or Blank Out New Name buttons. 
Click here to close this menu and use the New names you have entered. Where New names have been left blank, the Standard name will be used. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph.  The Drag Racing Analyzer has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures A21 and A22. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A22 Menu to Specify Graph Axes Scales 
This menu can be obtained 2 ways. You can click on View in the menu bar then Specify Scales (axes), or click on the Set Scales button, the right most button on the screen.  See Figure A21. 

The current scale limits are loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. 
Click on OK to have the graph redrawn to these new scale limits . 
These buttons determine if these scales are used, or graph is “auto-scaled”. 
Format Options 
Click on the Format menu item to be presented with several options which will be briefly discussed here. 
Line Style 
Click on Line Style to change the thickness of the graph lines. 
Titles and Labels 
Click on Titles and Labels to bring up option screen shown in Figure A18.  See choices shown in Figure A22. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 
Edit Printed Comments 
Click on Edit Printed Comments for the screen shown in Figure A23.  These settings only affect printouts. 
Grid Style 
Click on Grid Style to change or omit the drawing of grid lines on the graph. 
Back Color 
Click on Back Color to change the background color of the graph from white, black or gray.  Different Back Colors can make certain line colors stand out better, so experiment with your particular computer display and Line Style (thickness). 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices Figure A25 Edit Printed Comments 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Drag Racing Analyzer Appendices 








Drag Racing Analyzer Pro V2.0 for Windows 
User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48153 248-473-9230  Fax 248-442-7750 Website:  www.performancetrends.com Email:  feedback@performancetrends.com 
Performance Trends, Inc.   PO Box 530164, Livonia, MI 48153 Tech Assistance for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230   Fax: 248-442-7750  Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice 
Copyright (C) 2001 PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC.    All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp. 1987-1998 All Rights Reserved 
International Business Machines Corp. makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, regarding the enclosed computer package, its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.   
IBM PC, XT, and AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. 
DISCLAIMER Of WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION Of FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE Of SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY Of OBLIGATION Of PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES.  PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS Of PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE Of THE POSSIBILITY Of SUCH DAMAGES. 
Continued on next page. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS Of ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
******************************************* W A R N I N G *************************************** 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with engines and Tests.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-
     Obtaining data to input to the program 

-
     Interpreting the program's results 


Before making measurements of or modifications to any Test, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO: 
-
     Regard the safety consequences

 -
     Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 

-
     Read the entire user's manual

 -
     Obey all federal, state & local laws

 -
     Respect the rights and safety of others 



Acknowledgments: 
Several users have help us develop our Drag Racing programs.  Here are just a few we would like to thank. 
• 
Tim Gillespie 

• 
Ramon Valez 

• 
Ray Novak 

• 
Leonard Lamia 

• 
Dave Koehler 


Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
1.1  Overview of Features 1 
1.2 Before You Start                                         2 
1.3 A Word of Caution                                        3 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation)                           4 
1.5 Example to Get You Going                                 7 
Chapter 2 Definitions 11 
2.0 Basic Program Operation                                  11 2.1 Preferences  13 2.2 Engine 17 2.2B Engine Details                                              23 2.3 Transmission 29 2.3B Racing Centrifugal Clutch (Team Engr vers. Only) 35 
2.4 Body & Axle 39 
2.5 Wheels & Tires 47 
2.6 Driving Specs                                        51 
2.7 Calculated Performance 
2.7.1 Calculate Performance Conditions 59 
2.7.2 Calculated Performance Test Results 67 
2.8  Calculation Menus 71 
2.9 Match Vehicle Performance 91 
2.10 Throttle Stop Prediction 93 
2.11 Dial In Prediction 97 2.12 Saved Examples 101 2.13 Special Timer (Team Engr vers. Only) 105 2.14 Chain Calculations 107 2.15 Auto-Optimize 109 
2.16 Import Data Logger File (Team Engr vers. Only) 111 
Chapter 3 Output 113 
3.1 Analysis Reports           115 3.2  ASCII Data Files 117 3.3 Graphs 119 3.4 Printer Output                                          129 3.5 Data Libraries                                          131 3.6  History Log 135 
Table of Contents, cont 
Chapter 4 Examples                                             139    Example 4.1 Finding the Best Axle Ratio                      141    Example 4.2  Using the Match Vehicle Performance Option 151    Example 4.3  Predict Bracket Racing "Dial In" 161    Example 4.4  Predict Throttle Stop to Run Index 165 
Appendix 1:  Accuracy and Assumptions 169 
Appendix 2: General Tips 172 
Appendix 3: Backing Up Data 177 
Index, Chapters 1-3 181 Index, Chapter 4 and Appendices 185 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 
Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features  
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro is software for your personal computer to simulate a full power, standing start acceleration of most any vehicle you can design. Like its "little brother" the standard Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, it let's you play "what if" with engine power, weather, gear ratios, tire size, driving style, etc. and see the effect on ET, MPH, 60 ft times, tire spin, and much more. "Its like having a drag strip, dyno and chassis shop right in your computer." 
Standard Features: 
The Pro does everything the standard Drag Racing Analyzer Pro does. However, the Team Engineer Version has additional features not found in it or other drag racing simulation software: 
• 
User friendly, Windows interface, compatible with Windows 95, 98, Me, 2000 and NT. 

• 
Can print results using most any Windows compatible printer, usually in color. 

• 
Save nearly unlimited number of vehicles in various folders for recall, comparison and analysis in the future. 

• 
Allows several graphing options for analysis, either vs time in seconds or distance in feet. 

• 
Engine power can be modified during the run with throttle stops, nitrous oxide injection, and 'ram air' effect from the hood scoop. 

• 
Simulation of centrifugal clutches. 

• 
Detailed plots of up to 22 different calculated results (Fig 2) 

• 
Import results from data loggers or other sources for making comparisons of simulated results to actual measured results. 

• 
Additional "tunability" of the converter to better match your car’s performance. 

• 
Ability to specify converter "lock up" in different gears. 

• 
You can input more info into the Match Vehicle Performance screen to also more accurately adjust converter specs and tire growth. 

• 
Ability to create custom reports of results at various steps of time, distance or MPH. This allows you to check the effect of a modification on, say, 40 to 140 MPH times, or 500 to 1000 Ft times. 

• 
Chain calculations let you make several runs while the program automatically increments the spec of your choice. 

• 
Auto-Optimize feature (similar to Chain calculations), but you can try more specs at once as the program zeros in on your desired performance, like minimum ET, or the ET closest to (but slower than) 9.90. 

• 
bit program (Win 95/98/Me/2000) uses long file names. 

• 
Vehicle Weight Estimator, for estimating vehicle weights of popular production vehicles. 


Team Engineer Version: 
You can add the additional package of Team Engineer features, which include: 
• 
A complete Centrifugal (slider) Clutch builder program. 

• 
Ability to import data logger files for comparison and analysis. 

• 
More graph options like time alignment and dual cursors for analyzing sections of data. 

• 
The Special Timer for timing between 2 of most any type events during the run. 

• 
Engine RPM histograms. 


Please read Sections 1.2 "Before You Start" and 1.3 "A Word of Caution" before you turn on the computer.  Then try running the program following the guidelines in 1.4 "Getting Started" and 1.5 "Example to Get You Going".  When you feel a little familiar with the program, take time to read this entire manual.  It will show you all the things you can do with this powerful tool. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
IBM Pentium (or 100% compatible). 

• 
64Meg of RAM. 

• 
Approximately 20 Megabyte of disk space.  (More is required for storing large #s of vehicles.) 

• 
Windows 95, 98, Me, 2000 or NT. 


Many terms used by the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, i.e. Converter Stall RPM, Density Altitude , etc.  However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro folder. This file can be displayed right in the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro by clicking on Help at the Main Screen, then clicking on Display Readme.doc File.  You can also read it using utilities like NotePad or WordPad. 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures the legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode. All features work in Demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Standard version, or the Team Engineer version for ten days.  Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”.  This Unlocking Code will be for either the Standard version or the Team Engineer Version, whichever you have purchased.   
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your disk serial number (stamped in blue on the disk), your registered name and code number, and computer hardware number.  The registered name and code numbers are available by clicking on file in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as 
shown in Figure 1.1. 
Performance Trends will provide you an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking code number and click on OK.  If you typed in the number correctly, you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked to either the Basic or Pro mode.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 1.1, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers. 
You may need to transfer the program to another computer, like when you buy a new computer.  If so, install the program on the new computer.  It will run for 10 days.  During that 10 days, call when you can have your old computer up and running.  Go into the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro program, click on File, then Transfer Program to Another Computer.  Performance Trends will ask for some numbers from this screen and give you a code # which will permanently turn the program Off on this old computer.  Then give Performance Trends the information for the new computer and they will give you a new unlocking code free. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro is a comprehensive software package which estimates a vehicle's performance based on limited user input.  These estimates can be used for analysis of drag strip or normal street performance.  A vehicle is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible.  Therefore,  several simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level.  See the Assumptions in Appendix 1.  The user must recognize: 
The software can not predict the safety of a vehicle modification or driving situation.  Done correctly, with the proper quality parts and safety precautions, extreme vehicle conditions can be safe.  Done  by inexperienced racers with standard or low quality parts, a drag car can be a "disaster waiting to happen".  Please read and follow the "Safety Notes" as highlighted in this manual. 
The software, like any computer model, can NOT make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software is estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions within the program will limit the accuracy. 

• 
Environmental conditions, driver performance, track conditions, etc. are rarely constant and repeatable. 

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help you understand how a vehicle works; what parameters are important, how parameters interact, what are the tradeoffs, etc. 

• 
Point you in the correct, general direction for making modifications. This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, time slips, books, etc.  Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense to you. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all your data input. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Computer programs are written by normal people who can make mistakes.  It's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your phone call may help us correct it.) 




Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro from the distribution disks (floppy disks or CD Rom) to a hard drive before it will run.  To do this: 
Floppy Disks: 
• 
Start your computer. 

• 
Insert the distribution disk #1 into the floppy drive, for example the A drive. 

• 
Click on the Start button, then select Run. 

• 
Type in: 

A:SETUP    and press <enter> or click on Yes 

• 
Follow the instructions of the Setup program. 


CD Rom: 
• 
Start your computer. 

• 
Insert the CD into the CD tray and close the tray. 

• 
The installation Setup program will start automatically.  

• 
Follow the instructions of the Setup program. 

Then, to run the program once it is installed: 

• 
Click on Start, click on Programs, click on Performance Trends, click on Drag Racing Analyzer Pro 

• 
Or, double click on the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro icon on your desktop. 


Entering Registered Owner's Name: 
The first time you run the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, you will be asked to enter your name as the Registered Owner.  During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied.  Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a Registered Code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card. 
Click on Help, then About Drag Racing Analyzer Pro at the Main Screen to review your name and code # . 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures that legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Standard version, or the full Professional version for ten days.  All features are working in demo mode. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 

Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”.  This Unlocking Code will be for either the Standard version or the Team Engineer Version, whichever you have purchased. 
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your disk serial number,  registered name and code number, and computer hardware number. These are available by clicking on File in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as shown in Figure 1.2. 
Performance Trends will provide you with an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking code number and click on OK.  If you typed in a number correctly you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked to either the Basic or Pro mode.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 1.2, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers. 
Also See Section 1.2. 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 


1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer, click on Start, then Programs, then Performance Trends, and then Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, or simply click on the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro icon on your desktop.  During startup of the program, you will be given some introductory tips. 

From this main menu, you can: 
• 
Choose to review or modify any of the categories of vehicle specifications displayed. 

• 
Open or Save a file of complete vehicle specifications by clicking on the Open or Save buttons (first 2 buttons on the left) or the File menu item, then either Open or Save. 

• 
Add, edit or review vehicle comments to describe the vehicle currently held in the program.   

• 
Calculate vehicle performance from the options listed under Calculate Performance.  From here you can specify calculation options (barometric pressure, humidity, track length, etc.). 

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for you. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit, or click on the Quit button. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 
Figure 1.4,  Calculation Conditions Menu 

Click here to calculate ET & MPH performance shown in Figure 1.5 
In the Main Menu’s blue title bar you will notice the current Vehicle is [96 Mustang GT].  The program has descriptions of vehicles saved in the Library right from the factory.  The current file from the Vehicle Library is called 96 Mustang GT. 
To get started, let's examine (but not change) the various categories of specs.  Click on a button for one of the categories like Engine, Transmission, etc.  A new menu will appear displaying the various specs and the current values for the 96 Mustang GT vehicle.  You can click on the name of any spec and a brief description appears in the Help frame, along with a page # from this manual for more help.  You can return to the Main Menu by clicking on “OK (back)” or clicking on an area outside this menu. 
Now click on the Calculate Performance button in the Main Menu to calculate performance for this 96 Mustang GT vehicle. The next menu will show you the Calculate Performance Conditions menu as shown in Figure 1.4. 
For now, leave all the Calculation Conditions as they are and click on the Calculate Performance button.  This will start the program calculating performance for the specifications of the 96 Mustang GT stored in the Vehicle Library with the Calculation Conditions currently displayed.  A progress bar graph shows how the calculations are progressing.  The calculations may require several seconds on slower computers. 
The final results will appear in a table as in Figure 1.5.  The columns are for various types of readings (Gear #, MPH, etc) which occurred at critical points in the run, like the start, the end of each gear, beginning of each gear, 60 foot time, 60 MPH, etc. 
The results contain much information, some which may not be familiar to you.  However, the first three columns do look familiar:  Gear, Time and MPH. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 

If you look at the last row, you see a Time of 14.21  and a MPH of 98.2, or the car ran a 14.21 ET at 98.2 MPH.  If you look in the upper right corner you see a Summary of the Current and Last performance, including an “Improvement” or how much the current performance is better than the previous results.  You’ll notice that the 97.49 MPH in this section is slightly less than the MPH at the end of the MPH column.  That is because a drag strip uses 2 timing lights spread over the last 66 ft of drag strip to measure top speed through the traps.  These lights give a slightly lower MPH than the car actually ran at exactly 1320 feet.  To summarize, the MPH in the Summary best matches the MPH on a quarter mile time slip. 
The menu bar and the command buttons at the top of the screen shows some of the options for various formats for data output: 
• 
Analyze will produce a report of performance and safety tips on the test results 

• 
Graph will produce various types of graphs.  You can also compare the current results to results of the previous run, or some other runs you have saved. 

• 
Print lets you print these results on your printer. 


If you have a printer hooked up to your computer, try the Print command by clicking on Print in the menu bar or on the Printer button. A small menu of printout options is presented.  These options allow you to enter a report comment, include vehicle specs and comments in the printout, etc.  These options are explained in Section 3.4.  For this first time, accept the default settings and print the report by clicking on Print Results. 
To help explain the other columns of output, simply click on those results.  A definition of that particular data will be presented in a Message box as in Figure 1.6.  Then click on OK when you have read the definition. 
For a detailed explanation of all the results, Calculation Conditions, and output options, go to Section 2.7 and Chapter 3. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 1  Introduction 

Clicking on Back or pressing the <ESC> key will return you to the Main Menu.  From the Main Menu you can modify the 96 Mustang GT  to see the effect on performance.  For example you could go into any of the component menus and: 
• 
Change to a different rear axle ratio. 

• 
Install ‘stickier’ tires. 

• 
Change weather or wind conditions. 


The beauty of the program is that it repeats exactly each time.  This lets you find differences which would be “clouded” by changes in track conditions or driver variations. 
Many of the input specifications you see in the various menus may not be familiar to you.  For a brief definition of the inputs, simply click on the specification name.  The definition will appear in the Help frame with a page # in this manual for more info. 
Some of the vehicle specifications have “Clc” buttons.  One example is Dew Point in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu.  “Clc” stands for "calculate".  For example, if you want to calculate the Dew Point from wet and dry bulb readings, simply click on the Clc button.  The program will display a new menu listing the inputs and the Calc Dew Point from these inputs.  For further explanation, click on the Help buttons in these menus. To use the Calc Dew Point calculated from these inputs, click on the Use Calc Value button.  Otherwise click on Cancel to return to the Calculate Performance Conditions menu with no change to Dew Point.  Section 2.8, Calculation Menus explains all these calculations. 
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various performance calculations, read Section 3.5 of this manual called Data Libraries to learn how to save a set of vehicle specifications or recall information which has been previously saved.  Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Figure 2.1 shows the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro’s Main Menu with explanations of your options here.  Figure 2.2 shows the Body & Axle menu with explanations of options for most component menus. 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 



2.1 Preferences 
Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Screen to bring up the Preferences menu shown in Figure 2.3. Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. Preferences may also save time by eliminating steps you don't require. 
Program Title Comments 
Enter most any text here for the First and Second lines.  These 2 lines will appear at the top of printouts and printed graphs.  This is a good place for your business name or your personal name.  You can change these entries as often as you wish. 

Use Alternate Location for Files  
Some users (typically those on a network) may need to store their data files in a location another than in the DRPFILES folder in the DRP20 folder (the folder containing the actual  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro program).  For example, you may want to put the files on the E drive so other computers can access them.  If so, choose Yes and then the spec Path to Files will be enabled. 
In most all situations (except for network users) it is STRONGLY recommended you keep this marked No. 
It is also STRONGLY recommended that if you do choose Yes, that you do NOT keep changing this back and forth from No to Yes.  This will produce possible errors when saving or opening files.  This will be due mostly to saving them in one location and then looking for them in another location. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Path to Files 
If you set the previously described Use Alternate Location for Files spec to Yes, this spec becomes enabled.  Enter the full path to the new location for the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro data files.  For example, if you want to store the files on the E drive, enter the path: 
E:\ 
Either before you make this change in the Preferences menu, or immediately after that change, you must copy the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro data folder (directory)  DRPFILES to the new location on the E drive (in the root directory).  
If this process seems complicated or you are not familiar with Windows copy commands or folders, DO NOT use this option.  Keep the spec Use Alternate Location for Data Files set to No. 
Default Floppy Disk Drive 
Choose the letter of the floppy disk drive on your computer, usually A . This is the disk drive which will be first opened when using the Save to Floppy Disk or Open from Floppy Disk File commands at the Main Screen. 
Time Step for Calculations 
Select .01 for times like ET, 60 foot time, Dial In predictions, etc to be given to the nearest hundredth of a second.  This will have calculations run about 5 times faster.  If you have a faster computer and/or want better precision, select .001 for times to be calculated to the nearest thousandth of a second. 
# Tests Kept in History Log 
Pick the number of tests which you want the History Log to hold,  from 25 to 100. 
Remind on Tire Wt Change 
Select this option and the program checks if you have made a significant weight change to the wheels or tires in the Wheels/Tires menu.  If you have the program will ask if you want the same weight change to be made to the total vehicle weight. 
For example, if you are installing lighter wheels and tires on your street car, you probably want the vehicle weight lightened by the amount the wheels and tires are lighter than the original ones.  However, if you are running a class where your vehicle weight must remain at a certain level, you can gain an advantage by reducing the weight of the wheels and tires (reducing rotating inertia), but then adding ballast to the car so the total weight stays the same.  This is a case where you do not want the vehicle weight changed by the amount you lightened the wheels and tires. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Printer Fonts 
Choose which basic type of font to use for printouts.  You may not get your choice if your printer does not support that particular font. 
Printed Graph Width, % of Page 
Due to the endless combinations of computers, Windows setups and printers, some printed graphs may not fill the page, some may extend off the page to the right.  This option lets you expand (% greater than 100) or shrink (% less than 100) the printed graph to better fit the page. 
Always Autoscale New Graph 
Choose Yes for 'Always Autoscale New Graph' and each time you do a new graph, the graph is autoscaled (program picks the scales to show all data).  This is usually the best for beginners.  Choose No and any manual scales you have set will be 

to open a screen for setting the colors of the graph lines.  See Figure 2.5. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Restart Showing Help Tips 
Click on the Restart Showing Help Tips button to start showing the Help Tips which appear in the program.  These Tips usually appear only once each time you run the program, unless you click on the "Don't Show This Again"  box in the lower left corner of the tip.  See Figure 2.6. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.2  Engine 
The Engine specs describe the engine's size in cubic inches, its torque and HP, and what power correction was used for rating the engine’s torque and HP. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Method of Describing Power Curve 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Peak HP Only 

• 
Peak Torque and HP Only 

• 
Full Power Curve (which enables the 4 command buttons in this section as shown in  Figure 2.7) 

• 
Pick an Example 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen an example) 


Depending on your choice, the appropriate sections, buttons and inputs will be disabled (grayed out) and you will not be able to access them. 
Displacement, cu in 
The engine’s cubic inch displacement is used for 2 things: 
• 
First it is used to determine the shape of the power curve from limited user input, especially in the  case of specifying Peak HP Only. 

• 
It is used to estimate the amount of rotating inertia * in the engine and clutch/flywheel or converter if you have not entered it directly in the Engine Details menu.  The bigger the cubic inches, the larger the assumed rotating inertia. 


Therefore, even if you are specifying the Full Power Curve, enter the cubic inches to let the program better estimate the engine’s rotating inertia if you have not entered it directly in the Engine Details menu . 
* Definition of Engine Inertia:  The engine inertia is a measure of how massive the engine's rotating components are and how difficult it is to accelerate or decelerate the engine itself.  Most of the engine's inertia is contained in the flywheel/clutch assembly for a manual transmission, or in the torque converter for an automatic transmission.  The more massive or the larger the diameter the flywheel or any rotating engine component, the larger the inertia value. 
Peak Torque, ft lbs 
This is the maximum torque value for the vehicle's engine.  This information is listed in magazine articles, owner's manual/repair manual or from dynamometer tests.  See Appendix 2.  If this value is not known, one of Performance Trends’ Engine Analyzer programs will help you measure or estimate the engine's maximum torque.  If you have no information on Peak Torque, we recommend you select one of the example curves, select the Method of Describing Power Curve of Peak HP Only to eliminate this spec, or click on the Clc button to calculate Peak Torque from other inputs. 
RPM at Peak Torque 
This is the RPM at which the peak torque occurs.  This is listed in magazine articles, in the owners/repair manuals or dynamometer tests with the peak torque value (for example, 265 ft lbs @ 2800 RPM).  The RPM  at Peak Torque must be lower than the RPM at Peak HP.  If you have no information on RPM at Peak Torque, we recommend you select one of the example curves, select the Method of Describing Power Curve of Peak HP Only to eliminate this spec, or click on the Clc button to calculate Peak Torque from other inputs. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Peak Horsepower  
This is the maximum horsepower value for the vehicle's engine.  This information is listed in magazine articles, in an owner's manual/repair manual or from dynamometer tests.  See Appendix 2. If this value is not known, one of Performance Trends’ Engine Analyzer programs will help you measure or estimate the engine's maximum horsepower.  If you have no information on Peak Horsepower, we recommend you select one of the example curves, or use  Calculation Menu by clicking on the Clc button, or use the Match Vehicle Performance option and let the program estimate your peak HP. 
RPM at Peak HP 
This is the RPM at which the peak HP occurs.  This is listed in magazine articles, in the owner's/repair manuals or dynamometer tests with the peak torque value (for example, 189 HP @ 5200 RPM).  The RPM at Peak HP must be higher than RPM at Peak Torque if you are using the Peak Torque spec.  If you have no information on RPM at Peak HP, we recommend you select one of the example curves or estimate it at an RPM 500 RPM less than your shift RPM. 
Corr. Factor 
Since engine performance is strongly influenced by weather conditions, it is important to specify the conditions which give the torque and HP values you enter. For production engines, torque and HP values are corrected to conditions standardized by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE).  These conditions are approximately 29.6" Hg, 77 degrees F and 49 degrees F dew point (humidity) as specified by SAE procedure J-1349.  For  these engines, click on the down arrow of this combo box and select “SAE (29.6  77 deg)”. 
Dynamometers which mostly test racing engines (typical of magazine articles) generally correct their data to 29.92" Hg, 60 degrees F and approximately 0 degrees F dew point (no humidity). For  these engines, select “Std Dyno (29.92  60 deg)”.  Note that this “Race” correction factor gives power numbers about 2% higher than the SAE correction factor, even though the engine actually puts out no more power. 
Full Power Curve Features 
There are several ways to load in RPM, torque and HP data into the table on the right side of the Engine menu.  You can: 
• 
Calculate one based on simple inputs 

• 
Load an Example curve provided by Performance Trends 

• 
Load a curve calculated from one of our Engine Analyzer Programs 

• 
Type in readings from a dyno curve. 


If you type in readings, as soon as there 2 readings for any set of 3 inputs (RPM, torque HP), the 3rd one is automatically calculated and filled in, and the new point is added to the graph. 
The graph always shows a sharp drop in power after the highest RPM point in the table.  This is to remind you that this is what the program assumes for calculations, that engine power drops significantly (like it ran into an overspeed) after the highest RPM.  If you want the power to not drop so suddenly, then you must add an additional RPM above your current highest RPM, and enter a HP reading which draws the curve like you expect it to look. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Command Buttons 
Three of the command buttons in the Full Power Curve section are rather self explanatory: 
• 
Clear will blank out all the RPM, torque and HP entries. 

• 
Calculate will calculate a power curve from simple inputs.  See Section 2.8.1 on this Calculation Menu, which is the same as the Clc buttons bring up for the simpler power curve inputs in the left section. 

• 
Print will print the graph and table of power curve data. 


The other command “Load from Eng. Anlzr.” will be discussed in more detail below. 
Load from Eng. Anlzr. 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro can load engine power curves created by the proper Windows versions of Engine Analyzer, Engine Analyzer Plus, and Engine Analyzer Pro. 
Generally you will start this process by running the Engine Analyzer program first.  Once the Calculated Performance results 
have been calculated and displayed on the screen, click on the Send button in the Engine Analyzer. This Engine Analyzer menu looks similar to Figure 2.8.  It will ask what program do you want to send the power curve to, where you could click the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro option.  There are other options which you can refer to your Engine Analyzer manual. 
The process of loading Engine Analyzer results into Drag Racing Analyzer Pro is nearly automatic and consists of: 
1. 
Once you’ve selected the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro as the program to Send the results to, click on  the OK/Send button in the Engine Analyzer’s Send menu to leave the Engine Analyzer. 

2. 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro will be automatically activated and run. 

3. 
When the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro starts up the first time, you are given notice that a power curve is available and can be loaded from the Engine specs menu.  You will also notice some new commands on the Main Menu called “Engine Analyzer”.  Clicking on these will return to control to the Engine Analyzer program which originally called the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, but will leave the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro also running, ready for a new power curve. 

4. 
Important:  Once you load the power curve, the old power curve is gone, unless you saved the vehicle specs including power curve with the Save command or saved it as an Example by clicking on File, then Save As at the top of the Engine specs menu. 

5. 
When you are ready to return to the Engine Analyzer, simply click on one of the Engine Analyzer buttons (at the Main Menu or in the Test Results screen) or commands in the Menu bar.  You do not have to load the power curve. You can jump between the Engine Analyzer and Drag Racing Analyzer Pro as many times as you want. 


If an Engine Analyzer program is not currently running and “talking” to the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, you can also start the process by clicking on the Load from Eng. Anlzr. button.  You will get the screen of Figure 2.8. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Troubleshooting 
If this process of loading  power curves into the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro from the Engine Analyzer does not work like described above, consider the following. 
• 
You do not own the correct Windows version of Engine Analyzer program. 

• 
You have renamed the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro or Engine Analyzer executable (.EXE) file. The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro should be DRP20.EXE. 

• 
In the Engine Analyzer program, click on the “Look for It” button by the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro option in the “Send” menu to see if the program can find a correct Windows version. 

• 
You are trying to help the programs transfer control to each other.  Do not minimize one of the programs, then activate the other program as this can confuse the process. 


Edit Power Curve 
Click on Calculate New Tq/HP Specs to generate a full power curve or just peaks based on some simple inputs.  See Section 
2.8.1 for more details. 
Click on Calculate/Edit  at the top of the screen for the options shown in Figure 2.9.  Select one of the Edit options to be presented with the % Increase in HP screen shown in Figure 2.9..  There you can type in a percentage you want the program to increase or decrease the power specs by. 
Click on Resort Power Curve Table to put your power curve entries in correct RPM order.  See Figure 2.9 for an example.  This command is not shown unless you are entering a full power curve. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions (C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.2 B  Engine Details  
The Engine Details describe the engine in more detail than allowed at the main Engine specs menu. 

Hood Scoop 
Hood Scoop being Used? 
Click on down arrow button to pick Yes or No.  A Hood Scoop is any method of capturing the 'ram air' effect due to vehicle speed of incoming air which raises air pressure to the engine: cowl induction, inlets under the bumper, in headlight pockets, etc.  If you choose Yes, enter the efficiency of the hood scoop below. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Hood Scoop Efficiency 
Is the efficiency of capturing all the possible 'ram air' pressure of the incoming air.  Production hood scoops are anywhere from 0-40% efficient.  Tall 'Pro Stock' style scoops can be up to 100% efficient.  Click on the Clc button to calculate from measured data from your car. 
Hood scoops increase power for 2 reasons.  First they let the engine draw air which is cooler than underhood air.  This effect (or lack of it) can be simulated in the Track Weather Conditions by specifying the appropriate Eng Int Air Temp.  Second, the hood scoop adds boost pressure (like a small supercharger) from the "ram air" effect.  Generally this effect is small until speeds go over 100 MPH.  This "ram air" effect is what Hood Scoop Efficiency describes.  Use Table 2.1 for picking an appropriate value. 
Table 2.1, Estimate of Hood Scoop Efficiency, % 
Scoop Description  Hood Scoop Efficiency  
No Scoop  0  
Small Scoop in Low Pressure Area  20  
Large Scoop in Low Pressure Area  50  
Small Scoop in High Pressure Area  50  
Large Scoop in High Pressure Area  100  

Note:  A large scoop may require you to increase the vehicle's aerodynamic drag coefficient some (.01 or .02) to simulate this additional protrusion and greater drag. 
Engine Inertia 
Inertia to Use 
Click on down arrow button to pick either to let the program estimate engine inertia, or for you to tell the program the engine's inertia in the spec below. 
Inertia, lb x ft^2 
Engine inertia in pounds times feet squared.  Engine inertia is a rating of how difficult it is to 'rev up' the engine's rotating components.  This inertia includes anything that spins at engine RPM, like flywheel, converter, clutch disk, pressure plate, etc. Most of the engine's inertia is contained in the flywheel/clutch assembly for a manual transmission, or in the torque converter for an automatic transmission.  The more massive or the larger the diameter the flywheel or any rotating engine component, the larger the inertia value.  Values for inertia are difficult to obtain, therefore Table 2.2 is provided for estimating inertia. You can also click on the Clc button to calculate from measured or descriptive data. 
Table 2.2, Estimate of Engine Inertia, lb ft^2 
Engine Size  Heavy Duty  Std Duty  Lightened  
Less than 2.0L (122 cid)  4.0  3.0  2.0  
2.0 - 3.5L (122-214 cid)  5.0  4.0  3.0  
3.6 - 5.0L (215-307 cid)  7.0  6.0  4.0  
5.1 - 6.5L (308-400 cid)  11.0  9.0  5.0  
6.6 - 8.0L (401-490 cid)  14.0  12.0  7.0  
Greater than 8.1L (491 cid)  18.0  15.0  9.0  

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Throttle Stop 
Type 
Click on down arrow button to pick the type of throttle stop you are using (if any), and number of times the stop comes On.  Your choice here will determine which specs are enabled in this section. Choosing an option other than None will have power reduced from the current engine power curve during the run at certain times.  In real drag racing, power is usually reduced when a throttle stop is applied.  Usually this timer is started with the transbrake switch or when the clutch is released, which is what the 'Pro' assumes. 
Due to the time it takes the car to respond to release of the trans brake or clutch and to 'roll out' of the timing lights (usually .1­.4 seconds), the throttle stop starting time will not match the ET timer.  For example, if you specify 1st Stop, Start Time to start in 2 seconds, and the rollout required .2 seconds and Vehicle Response is .1 seconds, the throttle stop will come on at 1.7 seconds on the ET timer. See Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
Note:  Due to the number of assumptions the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro 'Pro' must make, the effect of the throttle stop will not be exact to within .01 seconds.  However, the trends shown by the program will be correct.   
To predict exact throttle stop settings for running a particular index, see section 2.10. 
Total Carb CFM 
Is the total 4 BBL CFM rating for all carbs.  For example, for a single Holley 600 4BBL, it would be 600.  For dual Holley 1150 4BBLs, it would be 2300.  Click on the Clc button to calculate from measured data. 
Start Time 
Is the time from the start of release of trans brake or clutch (including vehicle rollout) until the throttle stop comes On (closes throttle).  This will not exactly match the ET timer, since rollout starts before the ET timer. See Type above and Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
Time On 
Is the amount of time the throttle stop stays On (keeps throttles closed). 
% Carb Closed 
Describes how much of the carb's flow area is closed off.  Click on the Clc button to calculate from measured data. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Nitrous Oxide 
Type 
Click on down arrow button to pick the type of nitrous injection system you are using (if any).  Your choice here will determine which specs are enabled in this section.  Choose something other than None to specify that power will be added to the current engine power curve during the run at certain times.  In real racing, power is usually added when nitrous oxide is injected at a certain time into the run.  Usually this timer is started with the transbrake switch or when the clutch is released, which is what the 'Pro' assumes. 
Due to the time it takes the car to respond to release of the trans brake or clutch and to 'roll out' of the timing lights (usually .1­.4 seconds), the nitrous injection starting time will not match the ET timer.  For example, if you specify Delay Time to start in 2 seconds, and the rollout required .2 seconds and Vehicle Response is .1 seconds, the nitrous injection will come on at 1.7 seconds on the ET timer. See Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
Choose None for this spec if either: 
• 
The vehicle does not have nitrous oxide injection. 

• 
The nitrous oxide injection is started at the beginning of the run and is kept the same through the entire run.  In this case, be sure the current power curve (as shown in Figure 2.4) includes the power from the nitrous system. 


Generally, there are 2 types on nitrous systems.  The staged system where the nitrous comes on fully for each stage when a button is pressed or relay switched with a timer.  If a staged system is rated at 150 HP, you immediately get 150 HP when the system comes on.  A progressive system lets the nitrous come on gradually.  This system is usually easier to control for maintaining traction. 
Tip:  You can simulate changes in engine power during the run due to things other than nitrous injection using these specs.  These effects could include: 
• 
Spark advance or retard changes programmed into a spark controller. 

• 
Thermal effects from the engine heating up. 

• 
Boost changes controlled by a timer. 


For example, to simulate a gradual power loss of 10 HP during a run (perhaps due to the engine heating up), set the following: 
• 
Drop 10 HP from the current power curve at all RPMs at the main Engine Specs screen, Section 2.2. 

• 
Specify a Progressive Nitrous System in Engine Details. 

• 
Set Progressive Delay Time to 0 seconds, to start immediately. 

• 
Set Prog. Start Nitrous HP at 10 HP. 

• 
Set Prog. Time to Full Nitrous to the approximate time of your run, your ET. 

• 
Set Prog. Full Nitrous HP at 0 HP. 


This will add 10 HP to the start of your current power curve which you artificially reduced by 10 HP.  Therefore, you are starting at your actual HP level.  But then through the run, you are gradually reducing HP until you have 10 less HP at the end of the run. 
Progressive Delay Time 
Is the time from the start of vehicle rollout (release of trans brake or clutch) until the nitrous oxide starts to be injected. This will not exactly match the ET timer, since rollout starts before the ET timer. See Type above and Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Prog. Start Nitrous HP 
Is the HP rating of the nitrous system when the system first comes on.  The program assumes you get the full HP the system is rated for. 
Prog. Time to Full Nitrous 
Is the time from the start of injection to the time of full nitrous injection (injecting the full HP rating).  
Prog. Full Nitrous HP 
Is the HP rating of the nitrous system when the system is at full injection. The program assumes you get the full HP the system is rated for. 
First Stage 
Is the time from the start of vehicle rollout (release of trans brake or clutch) until the nitrous oxide starts to be injected for the 1st stage. This will not exactly match the ET timer, since rollout starts before the ET timer. See Type above and Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
Second Stage 
Is the time from the start of vehicle rollout (release of trans brake or clutch) until the nitrous oxide starts to be injected for the 2nd stage. This will not exactly match the ET timer, since rollout starts before the ET timer. See Type above and Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
Third Stage 
Is the time from the start of vehicle rollout (release of trans brake or clutch) until the nitrous oxide starts to be injected for the 3rd stage. This will not exactly match the ET timer, since rollout starts before the ET timer. See Type above and Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
First Stage HP Rating 
Is the HP rating of the 1st nitrous stage. The program assumes you get the full HP the system is rated for. 
Second Stage HP Rating 
Is the HP rating of the 2nd nitrous stage. The program assumes you get the full HP the system is rated for. 
Third Stage HP Rating 
Is the HP rating of the 3rd nitrous stage. The program assumes you get the full HP the system is rated for. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions (C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.3 Transmission 
This screen lets you describe the Transmission and whether you are using a clutch or torque converter between the engine and transmission. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Clutch/Converter 
Clutch 
Type 
Identifies if coupling between the engine and the transmission is through a friction clutch or hydrodynamic torque converter consisting of an impeller, turbine and reactor (or stator), typical of most automatic transmission converters.  Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs (recommended for beginner users using clutches) 

• 
Use Clutch Specs Below (lets you enter centrifugal racing clutch specs also) 

• 
Pick Example Clutch 

• 
Use Converter Specs Below 

• 
Pick Example Converter 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen a clutch or converter example) 


Depending on your choice, the appropriate sections, buttons and inputs will be disabled (grayed out) and you will not be able to access them. 
Figure 2.12  Additional Specs for Racing Centrifugal 
Type 
Clutches Team 
Choose the type which best describes your clutch. 
Engineer 
The top 2 choices are for standard clutches (where 
version 
the clutch force is constant) and just identifies the 
presents this 
material of the clutch disk, either organic 
command 
(sometimes called a “rag” clutch which is an older 
button which 
style material) or metallic (which is common in 
opens up the 
most racing clutches). If you do not know  the 
options shown 
Clutch Material, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 

Click here to have program pick a centrifugal 
The third choice of Racing Centrifugal Clutch 
enables several additional clutch specs.  Centrifugal 
force to give a
clutches are ones where the clamping force (which 
particular lock 
controls the torque which passes through a clutch) 
up RPM. 
increases with RPM.  At low RPM, the clutch is most likely slipping to reduce torque to the tires and controlling tire spin.  At higher RPM, once the car has launched and is down the track, the clutch locks 
Estimated lock 
up more completely for reducing HP losses due to 
up RPM for 
clutch slippage. 
current combination of centrifugal clutch specs 
Clutch Diameter, inches 
Identifies the outside diameter of the clutch disk measured in inches.  If the Clutch Diameter can not be easily measured, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Clutch Force, lbs 
Identifies the clamping force the pressure plate exerts to squeeze the clutch disk(s).  Manufacturers of aftermarket, racing type pressure plates generally specify this force in lbs (pounds of force). If you do not know this force, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 
# Clutch Disks 
Is the number of clutch disks, which will be 1 for most all production type clutches.  Only special racing clutches will have more than 1 disk, perhaps 2, 3 or 4 disks. If you do not know  the # Clutch Disks, let the program estimate it by selecting the Type called Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs. 
Clutch I. Diameter, in 
Enter the Inside Diameter of the clutch disk.  This must be less than the Outside Diameter listed above. 
Friction Coefficient 
Enter the friction coefficient for the clutch disk material.  Currently there are 3 materials which are commonly used in drag racing.  See Table 2.3 below.  As we develop more experience, these numbers will be fine tuned.  The latest numbers can be found by clicking on the spec Friction Coefficient and checking the Help Description in the lower right corner of the Transmission Specs screen. 
Table 2.3  Estimated friction Coefficients 

Material Number  Est. Friction Coefficient  Description  
5130  .30  Stickiest, hardest launch  
5050  .26  Half way between 5130 and 5191  
5191  .22  Less sticky, softer launch  

Centrifugal Force, lbs 
Enter the additional clutch force created by the centrifugal weights at some particular RPM.  This is the additional force above that created statically by the springs. In the Team Engineer version, click on the 'See Centrifugal Clutch Details' to calculate. 
Centrifugal Force RPM 
Enter the RPM which produces the additional Centrifugal (dynamic) force listed above. 
Clutch Lock Up RPM 
“Clutch Lock Up RPM based on Current Clutch Specs, Full Throttle Engine Power Curve and Weather Specs at the track” is the RPM where engine torque is exactly equal to the torque holding capability of the clutch you have specified.  As you change clutch specs, you will see Lock Up RPM change. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Converter 
Converter Capacity 
Describes the size or capacity of the torque converter in units of RPM per square root of torque (ft lbs).  The higher the capacity (sometimes called "K" factor), the higher the converter slip for a given amount of input torque.  High capacity converters are generally smaller in diameter, have internal blade modifications and are rated by their stall RPM for a given amount of engine input torque.  Stall RPM is the engine RPM at full throttle when the converter output RPM is 0, which occurs with the transmission in gear with the drive tires not turning (trans brake is On). 
Technically, if you know the engine’s torque at stall, Converter Capacity can be calculated by the following equation: 
Converter Capacity =
               Stall RPM        Engine Torque @ Stall 
High capacity torque converters are used in drag racing primarily to allow the engine to rev into it's high RPM power band at the line.  However, high capacity converters generally have more slip at high speed, possibly lowering your quarter mile MPH. 
Note:  You may wonder why you can't just use the converter's stall RPM, instead of Capacity.  The fact is a converter does not have a single stall RPM, but a different stall RPM for various amounts of engine torque.   
For example, when an engine is idling against a stalled torque converter the "stall RPM" is the idle RPM. Open the throttle slightly and produce more torque and the "stall RPM" increases.  How stall RPM changes with various amounts of engine torque is defined by Converter Capacity.  Only by using Converter Capacity can you accurately see how stall RPM and vehicle performance changes with changes in engine output torque. Engine torque can be affected by many things, including weather, % throttle, engine modifications, etc. 
Conv Tq Multiplication 
Describes the amount of torque multiplication produced by the torque converter at stall (when the drive tires are not turning). A torque converter increases engine torque at stall, similar to a gear box.  As the vehicle starts to move and converter output RPM increases, torque multiplication drops.  At higher converter output RPMs, torque multiplication eventually reaches 1:1 (no torque multiplication but no torque loss).  The Conv Tq Multiplication spec is generally not available from converter manufacturers (but it should be).  Unless you know your converter’s torque multiplication, use a value of 2. 
Conv Slip Factor  
The ideal drag racing converter would be one which was loose at low speed giving a high stall RPM, but would be very tight (low slip and high efficiency) at high speed.  This is very difficult to accomplish with real parts. 
The Slip Factor is an arbitrary rating of the amount of slip in the converter at the coupling point or at high speed.  A value of 10 indicates a great deal of slip and inefficiency at high speed, where a value of 0 indicates the tightest realistic open converter at high speed.   
Generally, a smaller diameter converter is more likely to be tight at high speed.  This means a 7" converter is more likely to have a Slip Factor of 2 than a 10" converter.  If you are unsure, click on Get Examples to pick examples or use the typical value of 5. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Tip:  Note that you can simulate a completely “locked up” converter (0 slip) in any gear other than 1st gear. 
Transmission 
Type 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Use Specs Below 

• 
Pick Example Transmission 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen a transmission example) 


The major differences between an automatic or manual transmission in this program are: 
• 
An automatic transmission uses a torque converter.  This you select in the Clutch/Converter section. 

• 
An automatic transmission has higher power losses due to the pump and larger areas for fluid friction.  This is 


represented by the Efficiency, % spec in the Transmission section. The program will let you  combine a clutch with an automatic transmission (lower Efficiency rating) or a torque converter with a manual transmission (higher Efficiency rating).  It also lets you combine any combination of example clutches, converters and transmissions. 
Efficiency, % 
Is the amount of power which actually leaves the transmission compared to the amount which entered the transmission gets from the engine.  Automatics are about 3-6 % less efficient than manual transmissions.  The more “heavy duty” the transmission, the less efficient (larger bearing areas).  The fewer the number of gears, the more efficient the transmission.  Click on the down arrow key to pick an efficiency from the list.  Examples of  transmissions with these efficiencies are also given in this list. 
Note:  You can pick any efficiency, even though the label does not match your car.  For example, say you are working with a Ford C6 rated at “88% 60s Hvy Dty 3 spd Auto”.  You have made some improvements like going to a lighter fluid.  Simply select an efficiency which is 1 to 2% higher than what you currently have Efficiency set at, even though 89% is called “89% 60s AWD 3 & 4 spd Auto”.  The Efficiency of 89% is still slightly better than 88%, even though you do not have All Wheel Drive. 
First (1) Gear Ratio Second (2) Gear Ratio Third (3) Gear Ratio Fourth (4) Gear Ratio Fifth (5) Gear Ratio Sixth (6) Gear Ratio 
Are the gear ratios in the transmission.  If you do not know your transmission’s gear ratios, select one of the examples.  Even though your transmission is not listed, select one with the same number of gears.  This will be closer than guessing. 
Converter Locked Up? 
Click on down arrow to select if converter is 'locked up' for a particular gear.  The program forces that all gears must also be locked up above the initial gear where you specify lockup.  This means that if you specify, say, that 2nd gear is locked up, then 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
3rd gear can not go back to being an open converter, but is also forced to be locked up.  This is how most transmissions work anyway.  NOTE:  Usually only newer, production transmissions have converters which 'lock up'. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.3 B Racing Centrifugal Clutch (Team Engineer Version Only) 
This screen (only available in the 'Team Engineer' version) contains several features for you to "build" and analyze centrifugal clutches. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
You can also build, compare and switch between 3 different proposed setups.  Click on Compare to choose from 1-3 clutches to build and compare on this screen.  Click on Clutch to Use to pick which of the 3 clutches to use (or choose None for none of these 3) in the Transmission specs.  This will then be the clutch used for the next performance simulation. 
The process of building a clutch consists of:  
1. 
First pick a Style of Clutch Arm (marked Arm, Clt #).  You can pick one of the pre-programmed examples, or build your own arm style by selecting User Defined as the style. 

2. 
You can type in most any Static Force, or click on the Calc button and calculate a Static Force from Number of Springs, Spring Rate, Number of Screw Turns, etc or pre-programmed examples for various clutch manufacturers.  You can also pick from some pre-programmed examples of springs. 

3. 
If you picked a pre-programmed Style of Clutch Arm, then all you need to enter is the Number of Arms of this style in your clutch, the counter weight you've added (enter 0 for no counter weight), and your Ring Height.  Note that this Ring Height must be within 0.100" of what the arm style is rated for. It is also highly recommended that the Ring Height should be kept very close (within .03”) of the manufacturer’s recommendation for accurate clutch force calculations. 

4. 
If you picked User Defined as the Style of Clutch Arm, then enter the 3 specs outlined in step 3 above.  In addition, you must describe the arm in some detail to the program.  That is done by telling the program what force the arm can generate at some RPM, both with some counter weight and without any counter weight).  This information is entered in the 5 new input boxes which appear when you specify User Defined as the style of Clutch Arm. 

5. 
You can also enter a comment to describe the particular arm and condition in the 'Description of Condition' boxes under the graph.  These comments are printed with reports and saved with the clutch arm specs if you choose to save a set of User Defined clutch arm specs. 


If you are working with a User Defined clutch arm, you can also Save these 5 specs which describe the arm.  Click on the Save button and the program will ask you for a name.  After you enter the name, you will see this name added to the list of Styles of Clutch Arms.  This name is also what that particular clutch arm will now be called.  Note that since the program has limited info on these User Defined clutch arms, it does not know the effect of changing Ring Height, and Ring Height is disabled for these types of arms. 
Important:  When you Save User Defined clutch arm specs, you are only saving the 5 User Specified Conditions and the Description of Condition comment.  You are not saving the Static Force, the Weight Added you are actually using, the clutch diameter or friction coefficient from the Transmission Specs screen, etc. The only way to save your entire clutch setup is to go back to the Main Screen and save the entire Vehicle. 
As you change clutch specs, you will see the graph updated.  If you choose the options Analyze Torque and Include Engine Torque, then you will also be given the theoretical Lock Up RPM.  This is the RPM where the clutch's holding torque is equal to the engine's torque.  Clutch holding torque also depends on the clutch specs back on the Transmission Specs screen, like Outside Diameter, Friction Coefficient, etc.  Engine Torque is based on the engine power specs plus any effect from track weather conditions.  It is not based on additional engine details like Hood Scoop, Throttle Stop or Timed Nitrous Oxide effects. 
Click on OK (back) to return to the Transmission Screen.  If you have set 'Clutch to Use' to one of the clutches, then a summary of that clutch's specs will be loaded in the Clutch Specs, and the Clutch Type will be set to "Example:  Use Centrifugal Details".  These clutch specs will be used in the next performance simulation. 
Important:  The purpose of centrifugal clutches is to provide more control over how torque is applied to the drivetrain, to prevent the tires from “breaking loose” with high powered engines.  In order to simulate how changes in centrifugal clutch specs will change actual performance, including the critical part of the launch, you must set the Driving Spec of Launch Type to Use Specs Below.  Also, be sure to set the Launch Specs of Launch % Clutch and Launch % Throttle in the Driving Specs correctly for how you drive and control the engine and clutch. The program will then simulate how the clutch is applying torque and you can see if changes in settings will loose traction or provide for a quicker ET. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Other options on this screen include: 
• 
Click on Report to create a list of clutch forces or torques at various RPMs for all 3 clutches.  These can be printed and edited in Windows Notepad. 

• 
Click on Options to choose the RPM range for the graph, choose between analyzing just clutch force or clutch torque, and whether to include the engine torque curve on the graph. 

• 
Print lets you print this screen and change the Windows Printer Setup. 


Compare 
Click on down arrow button to pick how many clutches to compare in this screen, from 1 to 3.  Your choice here will change this screen and the number of columns displayed for either 1, 2 or 3 clutches. 
Clutch to Use 
Click on down arrow button to pick which clutch specs to use, which will be copied back to the main Clutch/Transmission screen.  Select 'None' to not use any of these clutches. 
Arm, Clt 1 Arm, Clt 2 Arm, Clt 3 
Select the type of arm used for Clutch 1, 2  or 3, one of the 3 clutches for comparison on this screen.  Arm names which start with “User Spec” are arms which you have added to the program (not supplied by Performance Trends). 
Static Force 
Enter the static force for the clutch, the force from the springs only which is present at 0 RPM.  Click on the Calc. button to calculate from other specs. 
Number of Arms 
Enter the number of clutch arms being used with this clutch. 
Counter Weight, gms 
Enter the amount of counter weights added to each arm in grams. 
Ring Height, inches 
Enter the Ring Height in inches.  Ring Height (sometimes called “hat height”) is a spec from the clutch manufacturer.  This measurement will change with wear of the friction material off the disks.  It is usually best to adjust your clutch to maintain this spec constant.  The calculations are most accurate if your clutch’s Ring Height is held within .030 of the manufacturer’s specs. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
User Specified Conditions 
Obviously Performance Trends will not have pre-programmed clutch arm specs for every possible clutch ever made or that will be made in the future.  For clutches where no pre-programmed arm is available, you can create your own User Spec. clutch arm.  All that you need is to know what force the arm can generate at some RPM, both with some counter weight and without any counter weight.  This information is entered in the 5 new input boxes which appear if you select User Defined as the style of Clutch Arm.  You can get this information from your clutch manufacturer. 
Number of Arms 
At some known condition of force and RPM for these arms, enter the Number of Arms which produced the known conditions. 
RPM Producing Force 
At some known condition of force and RPM for these arms, enter the RPM which produced the known force, both with and without the Counter Weights. 
Force, Arms Only 
At some known condition of force and RPM for these arms, enter the force produced in pounds at the 'RPM Producing Force' with NO ADDED WEIGHTS. 
Force with Weights 
At some known condition of force and RPM for these arms, enter the force produced in pounds at the 'RPM Producing Force' with ADDED COUNTER WEIGHTS. 
Weight Added, gms 
At some known condition of force and RPM for these arms, enter the weight added to each arm in grams which produced the 'Force, with Weights'. 
Description of Condition 
Type in most any comment to describe the clutch setup or conditions for Clutch 1, 2 and 3. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.4 Body & Axle 
The Body & Axle specs describe the vehicle size, weight, suspension, final drive system and aerodynamics. 

Vehicle Weight Vehicle Weight, lbs 
Total vehicle weight in pounds with the driver.  For accurate predictions the weight you enter here is critical.  If you can not weigh your car, click on the Clc button to estimate your car’s weight if your car is a popular model for drag racing. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Axle Specs: 
Final Drive Ratio 
For rear wheel drive vehicles, this is the rear axle ratio; for front wheel drive vehicles, this is the gear ratio of the final drive gear or chain system in the transaxle.  For chain drive vehicle's (go carts, motorcycles, etc.) this is the chain ratio.  For motorcycles with a gear reduction between the engine and the transmission, you must multiply the chain ratio by this gear reduction to obtain the total Final Drive Ratio.  Click on the Clc button to obtain a menu to calculate Final Drive Ratio based on number of teeth for your particular situation. 
This information is available in magazine articles, owner's-repair manuals, on tags attached to the vehicle, or coded into the vehicle's identification number.   
One method of estimating the final drive ratio of a rear wheel drive vehicle without locked differentials (where the driveshaft is exposed) is to jack one of the rear tires off the ground, leaving the other rear tire on the ground.  Mark a spot on the driveshaft.  Rotate the tire which is off the ground exactly 2 complete revolutions.  The other tire must remain still (which it  will if you do not have a locked differential).  Count the number of revolutions the driveshaft turns.  This indicates the final drive ratio.  For example, if the driveshaft turns 3.5 times, the final drive ratio is 3.5. 
If you have a locked differential, the procedure is the same except you must have both rear wheels off the ground, and you rotate the tire only 1 turn (not 2). 
Safety Precaution:  This procedure should be attempted only by experienced mechanics, taking the proper safety precautions.  This procedure may not be possible for racing axles with locking differentials or "spools". 
Diff Lock Eff, % 
The final drive differential in either a front wheel drive's transaxle or rear wheel drive's rear axle can be either a locking type ("posi-traction", "traction-lock", etc.) or an "open differential" with no locking.  The locking type of differential tries to put the most power to the drive tire with the most traction. 
Production locking differentials do not do this perfectly, but some racing differentials do lock up completely.  Perfect lockup (100% lockup) can also be accomplished by welding the differential gears solid or by installing a "spool" to replace the differential.  Both of these modifications cause problems when turning corners, since now both drive tires must turn at exactly the same speed. 
The effectiveness of the differential's lockup also depends on the type of suspension for the drive axle.  Click on the down arrow of this combo box to select the description which best describes your car. 
Notes: 
This specification is ignored if the Driveline Layout is set to Front or All Wheel Drive or Motorcycle.  For Front Wheel Drive, the computer assumes a high  % lockup due to the front wheel drive's assumed independent front suspension. 
If the lockup is specified as 100%, then the specifications Rear Track Width and Frt Roll Stfns have no effect on the results and are disabled. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Axle Design 
Click on arrow button to select a general description of the axle and differential.  This will be used to estimate friction effects and HP losses. 
U Joint Angles 
Click on arrow button to select a general description of the angles of the driveshaft U-joint, or CV joints for front wheel drive. This will be used to estimate friction effects and HP losses. 
Body Details 
Type 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Use Specs Below 

• 
Pick Example Body 

• 
Example: Example Name (if you have already chosen a body example) 


Driveline Layout 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box to tell the program where the driving wheels are, or if you have a motorcycle.  If you  specify All Wheel Drive (same as 4 wheel drive), be sure to select a lower Transmission Efficiency to account for extra losses in the transfer case. 
% Wt on Rear Tires 
Describes the vehicle's weight distribution, indicating the % of the vehicle's total weight which is on the rear tires.  This information can be found in magazine road tests or owner's/repair manuals.  An example would be "weight distribution = 55/45" which indicates 55% of the vehicle's weight is on the front tires when the vehicle is stationary, and 45% is on the rear tires. 
It is also possible to measure the vehicle's weight distribution by weighing the vehicle with all 4 tires on the scale, and then weighing it with only the rear tires on the scale.  (Both weighings should be done with the driver and with the vehicle level.) Then use the formula: 
Formula to Calculate % Wt on Rear Tires 
% Wt on Rear Tires = Wt for Rear Tires Only x 100 Total Vehicle Weight 
For example, if the total vehicle weight is 4000 lbs and the rear tire weight is 1800, the Weight on Rear Tires is 1800 / 4000 x 100% = 45%. 
Since % Wt on Rear Tires has a Clc button, this calculation is computerized as shown in Section 2.8.10. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
  Figure 2.15,  Estimate of Height of CG 
Height of CG 
Describes the height of the vehicle's center of gravity from level ground.  A sports car will have a lower CG than a 
Estimated 
4WD truck.  Increasing the height of the CG (installing a 
Height 
lift kit) will improve weight transfer and therefore traction 
of C.G.  
in a rear wheel drive car for improved acceleration capabilities. 
Safety Precaution:  Transferring this weight to the rear  
means less weight is being applied to the front tires.   
Therefore, steering control can be adversely affected  
creating unsafe conditions.  Ground   Height of Front 
                                 of Crankshaft 
This information is not readily available, but can be  
 
estimated by measuring the distance from the ground to a  

spot approximately 5 inches above the center of the engine's crankshaft at the front of the engine (typical V-8 camshaft level).   
Estimate the Height of CG of motorcycles as half way between the rider's shoulders and the engine's crankshaft.  For example, if the height of the rider's shoulders is 40" and the crankshaft centerline is 14", the Height of CG would be (40 + 14) / 2 = 27". Obviously, driver position has a significant effect on this parameter. 
Click on the Clc button to actually measure the Height of CG from performing a rather involved and somewhat dangerous test on your car.  Unless you are a full time professional, it is usually best just to estimate the Height of CG from the previous suggestions.  See Section 2.8.11. 
Wheelbase 
Is the distance in inches from the center of the front wheels to the center of the rear wheels.  Decreasing the wheelbase will improve weight transfer and therefore traction and ET on a rear wheel drive car. 
Rear Track
  Figure 2.9,  Estimate of Rear Track Width 
Width, in 
Is the distance in inches from the center of one rear tire's track to the center of the other rear tire's track.  This value is used in conjunction with Frt Roll Stfns, % for determining how 


RWD vehicles "lift" the right rear tire. For front wheel drive cars, certain assumptions are made about the suspension, and this value is disabled. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Frt Roll Stfns, % 
Roll stiffness is the suspension's resistance to leaning as it goes through a cornering maneuver.  Part of the vehicle's total roll stiffness comes from the front suspension, and the rest comes from the rear.  Frt Roll Stfns, % is the percent of the vehicle's total roll stiffness present in the front suspension.   
For example, if the vehicle has a heavy rear anti-sway bar with stiff rear shocks, and no front anti-sway bar with soft front springs and shocks, only 25% of the vehicle's roll stiffness may be from the front suspension.  This particular set-up is good for "planting" both rear tires on the ground for good traction with a rear wheel drive car. 
Assume the Frt Roll Stfns, % is 75% (typical of most production cars) unless special modifications have been done to the suspension for drag racing.  Then reduce it to a value of 25-50%.  For front wheel drive cars, certain assumptions have been made about the suspension, and this value is disabled. 
Aerodynamics 
Type 
Click on down arrow button to pick a general description of the car's aerodynamics, or choose 'Use Specs Below' to enable the aerodynamics specs.  Then you can type in your own numbers to the specs below. 
Frontal Area, sq ft 
The frontal area is the area in square feet the vehicle's silhouette occupies when viewed from the front.  Use the formula in Fig 2.17 to estimate frontal area.  Frontal areas are in the range of 5 sq ft for a motorcycle, to 20 sq ft for a small passenger car to 30 sq ft or more for a full size pick­up truck.  Also see Section 2.8.12 for calculating Frontal Area, sq ft  by clicking on the Clc button. 
Drag Coefficient 
The coefficient of drag (Cd) is an engineering term used to describe how aerodynamic a vehicle's exterior design is (how easily it "slices" 

through the wind).  A low value for the Cd indicates the car is aerodynamic and requires little power from the engine to overcome wind resistance.  Many automotive manufacturers now publish the vehicle's Cd in advertising, since an aerodynamic car is a more fuel efficient car. An aerodynamic car is also a faster car.  If the actual Cd of a particular vehicle can not be found, use Table 2.3 to estimate the 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Cd for different types of vehicles  Use Table 2.4 to estimate how much Cd will change from a modification.  A more complete list is obtained by selecting one of the examples of Body Details. 
Table 2.3:  Estimate Drag Coefficient (Cd) 
Type of Vehicle or Modification  Cd  
Motorcycle  .70-1.10  
Modern Motorcycle (fairings, etc.)  .50-.70  
Pickup Truck  .50-.70  
Sedan before 1980  .45-.60  
Sports Car before 1980  .45-.55  
Open Convertible  .50-.70  
Modern Aerodynamic Sedan  .35-.45  
Modern Aerodynamic Sports Car  .30-.40  
“Best Case" vehicle  .11  

Table 2.4:  Estimate How Modifications Affect Cd and Cl (lift coefficient) 
Modification  Change Cd  Change Cl (lift)  
-4 deg Angle of Attack (vs stock) *1  -.04  -.20  
+4deg Angle of Attack (vs stock)  +.04  +.20  
Open Side Windows (vs closed)  +.02  
Open T-Top & Side Windows  +.08  
4" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle) *2  -.04  -.05  
8" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle)  .00  -.10  
12" Flat Air Dam (width of vehicle)  +.08  -.11  
1" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle) *3  -.03  -.03  
2" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle)  .00  -.05  
4" Flat Spoiler (width of vehicle)  +.08  -.07  
Blocking half radiator air flow  -.04  -.07  

Notes concerning Table 2.3 and 2.4: 
1* Change the vehicle's attitude from the production attitude 4 degrees, where a negative angle of attack is when the front is lowered and the rear is raised.                                                     
2* For this table, an air dam is defined as a flat plate the full width of the vehicle projecting vertically down directly below front bumper (based on typical 1970s or earlier design, say a 1974 Nova).  Most modern designs integrate air dams for optimum Cd, therefore adding an air dam to a modern vehicle will likely show an increase in Cd but perhaps a reduction in Cl. 
3* For this table, a spoiler is defined as a flat plate extending the full width of the vehicle at the top rear edge of the rear deck (trunk) lid, angled back 20 degrees from vertical. 
• 
Cl is the lift coefficient.  Assume that the lift coefficient was changed on the end of the car where the modification took place.  For example, if you added a 4” Flat Air Dam to the front, subtrack .05 from the current Front Lift Coefficient and leave the Rear Lift Coefficient unchanged. For changing the “Angle of Attack”, make the change to both the front and rear Lift Coefficients. 

• 
Table 2.4 shows typical effects from modifications.  Individual vehicle's can differ considerable. 

• 
Advertised Cds are usually the "best case".  For a realistic Cd, add .03 to .05 to the advertised Cd.  


Front Lift Coefficient 
Engineering term which describes how much lift is generated on the FRONT of the vehicle by its exterior design, the lower the number the less lift produced.  Negative (-) numbers can be entered to show that downforce is generated from spoilers, body rake, etc.  A stock body has a typical Lift Coeffcient of about .20, meaning it creates lift as it goes through the air.  This is not 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
good for traction.  Wings and spoilers are designed to produce downforce, which reduce the lift coefficient down to negative numbers, like -.20.  A negative lift coefficient is for a car body which produces true downforce at high speed, increasing traction.  Winged dragsters can actually produce lift coefficients of -1.00 or lower. 
See Table 2.4 for how lift coefficient can be changed by modifications.  Also see Section 2.8.14 on how you can calculate the actual Lift Coefficient based on data logger readings. 
Rear Lift Coefficient 
Engineering term which describes how much lift is generated on the REAR of the vehicle by its exterior design, the lower the number the less lift produced.  See Front Lift Coefficient above. 
Vehicle Height, in 
The average height of the vehicle from the ground.  This is used to estimate the aerodynamic effect of 'weight transfer' to the rear at high speed.  It can also be used to estimate the unloading of the front tires at high speed that dragsters can experience. 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 


2.5 Wheels/Tires 
The Wheels/Tires Specs describe the front and rear wheels and tires on the vehicle. 
  Figure  2.18 Wheels/Tires Menu 

Specs in this right hand section are critical to traction, and therefore have a large effect on ET, 60 foot times, etc. 
Front Wheel/Tire 
If you have specified Front Wheel Drive as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu, this section will be labeled Rear Wheel/Tire.  These wheel and tire specs are only used to estimate the inertia losses of accelerating these wheels and tires. 
Type 
Click on this combo box to select to Let Program Estimate Specs (recommended for most situations unless you are trying to estimate rolling inertia effects), Use Specs Below or Pick an Example. 
Wheels & Tires Wt, lbs 
This is the weight of one wheel/tire assembly, which can be obtained by weighing the tire mounted on the wheel on a weighing (or bathroom) scale.  The program assumes there are 2 front wheels and tires on the vehicle unless you have specified Motorcycle as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu. 
Tire Diameter, inches 
The diameter of the tire is the distance from the tread across the center of the wheel to the other tread.  This is sometimes referred to as how tall the tire is.  See Tire Diameter in the Rear Wheel/Tire section below for more details. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Rear Wheel/Tire Specs: 
If you have specified Front Wheel Drive as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu, this section will be labeled Rear Wheel/Tire. 
Wheels & Tires Wt, lbs 
This is the weight of one wheel/tire assembly, which can be obtained by weighing the tire mounted on the wheel on a weighing (or bathroom) scale.  The program assumes there are 2 rear wheels and tires on the vehicle unless you have specified Motorcycle as the Driveline Layout in the Body & Axle menu. 
Tire Diameter, inches
 Figure 2.19, Measuring Tire Diameter  
The diameter of the tire is the distance from the tread across the center of the wheel to the other tread.  This is sometimes referred to as how tall the tire is.  For example, for 10 x 32 inch slicks, the 32 refers to the diameter of the tire. 
This term has been changed from previous versions of Drag Racing Analyzer Pro which used the input of Rolling Radius, or the distance from the center of the wheel to the tread on the ground.  Tire Radius is actually more precise, but most racers were not familiar with the term, so we changed it to the more common Diameter.  Radius is approximately half of the Tire Diameter. 
Since tires can squat as they are mounted on the car or as you change air pressure, a better estimate of the diameter is to measure the distance in inches from the center of the tire to the ground, while the tire is mounted on the car.  This will give the radius,  which you can then multiply by 2 to obtain your best estimate of the tire’s diameter when  mounted on the car. 
Since Tire Diameter has a Clc button, see Section 2.8.15 for calculating Tire Diameter from other tire specs, like Rolling Radius, Circumference, or production tire sizes like P225-60-15. 
Construction 
The Construction type for the drive tire has a large effect on traction and therefore a large effect on the vehicle's maximum acceleration ability.  Click on the down arrow of this combo box to be presented with a list of choices.  
The Construction type and the following tire specs will determine the traction capability of the tires, and the amount of tire growth at high speed.  If you select anything other than Drag Slicks, the Tire Growth specs is disabled as these other types of tires do not exhibit much growth. 
Tread Width 
Is the width of the tire's contact patch on the ground, and has a large effect on the traction available, and to some extent the rolling resistance of the car.  Since Tread Width has a Clc button, see Section 2.8.15 for calculating Tire Width from other tire specs, like Rolling Radius, Circumference, or production tire sizes like P225-60-15. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Traction Factor 
Traction Efficiency describes how well the tires 'hook up' to the road surface.  It is affected by road surface condition (concrete vs asphalt, amount of traction compound, etc.), tire conditions (temperature, pressure, compound, etc.) and suspension setup (4 link adjustments, shocks, etc.). 
Obviously this spec has a critical impact on traction for all Tire Types.  Because it depends on so many variables, it is difficult to estimate.  You can click on the Clc button to obtain a general list of estimates.  Most likely you will have to fine tune this estimate based on your vehicle's actual 60 ft times at a particular track.  You can also use the Match Vehicle Performance option from the Main Menu to have the program estimate Traction Factor. 
Table 2.5 gives estimates of Traction Factor for different road surfaces.  
Tires behave quite differently on dirt or sand than concrete or asphalt, as assumed by the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro. Therefore, it can not accurately predict acceleration performance of vehicles on dirt or sand. 
Table 2.5 Estimate of Traction Factor 
Type of Tire/Surface  Traction Factor  
Dry Concrete with Traction Compound  95-105  
Dry Concrete  80-95  
Dry Asphalt  65-85  
Wet Roads  30-50  

Tire Growth, % 
The Tire Growth specs is only used for Construction type of Drag Slicks, and is disabled for all other Construction types.  The program’s definition for Tire Growth is the percent the drive tire’s radius (distance from center of wheel to the ground) will increase at 2000 wheel RPM with no additional aerodynamic down force or lift.  Because this may be difficult to estimate, it is again suggested you use the Match Vehicle Performance option from the Main Menu to have the program estimate Tire Growth.  You can also click on Examples to load in tires with estimated tire growths given, or click on the Clc button to pick from general categories of Growth. 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 


2.6 Driving Specs 
The Driving Specs describe how the driver controls gear changes, clutch release during the launch and power through the throttle.  After all specs are defined in this section below, a "Driving Specs Summary" section follows which describes how these options work together. 

Launch Specs 
The launch (getting the vehicle moving from its standing start) is probably the most critical element in drag racing.  The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro gives you several options for controlling engine power and clutch release during launch. 
Type 
Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to be presented with the following 3 choices: 
• 
Computer Driven-No tire spin 

• 
Use Specs Below (which can be difficult to work with) 

• 
Clutch-Maintain Launch RPM-No tire spin (a second “computer driven” option, available for clutches only) 

• 
Comp Drvn-No tire spin (set Start RPM) 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Depending on your choice of Type, some or all of the other Launch Specs will be enabled or disabled.  These types are explained below. 
Computer Driven-No tire spin 
The computer will hold the engine at full power and "feather" the clutch to put the most power to the ground, but still prevent the tires from slipping.  For transmissions with torque converters, the computer will hold the engine at full throttle and "feather" the drive axle's brakes to limit the power to the drive tires just enough to prevent tire spin.  This is similar to current production "anti-spin" traction control.  Selecting “Computer Driven-No tire spin” is the easiest way to launch the vehicle and make comparisons between vehicle modifications. 
This Type of launch may not always give the best ET.  For example, with very "sticky" tires and a clutch, the computer may release the clutch too quickly because the tires are not in danger of spinning.  This may cause engine RPM to drop too much at the line, perhaps slightly "bogging" the engine, which can actually occur with the real vehicle.  See the “Clutch-Maintain Launch RPM-No tire spin” option below. 
Use Specs Below 
The computer will drive exactly as specified by the other Launch Specs, which may allow the tires to "break loose" and spin.  This Type is useful for fine tuning your particular launch strategy, or to see how much the vehicle's ET. suffers when the tires "break loose". 
Clutch-Maintain Launch RPM-No tire spin 
This is very similar to “Computer Driven-No tire spin” in that the computer will hold the engine at full power and "feather" the clutch to put the most power to the ground, but still prevent the tires from slipping.  The difference is the computer will also not allow engine RPM to fall below Launch RPM, potentially eliminating engine bog.  This option is only available if the transmission  is using a clutch. 
Comp Drvn-No tire spin (set Start RPM) 
This choice is available only for torque converter cars and is very similar to “Computer Driven-No tire spin” .  The computer will hold the engine at full power and "feather" the brakes to put the most power to the ground, but still prevent the tires from slipping.  The difference is you can specify a Launch RPM or starting RPM, like the RPM being held by a “two step” type ignition system.  This is the RPM the engine starts at before the computer takes the engine to full power. Specifying a low RPM here will have the computer “ramp in” power and hit the tires softer. 
Launch RPM 
Is the RPM at which the engine is held at the starting line before the clutch or trans brake is released. 
Launch % Clutch 
Is the amount the clutch is "feathered" at the starting line at the beginning of the Launch Time.  The program then increases this amount until it is at 100% at the end of the Launch Time. 
Launch % Clutch specifies how much of the total clutch force is allowed to grip the clutch disc (or put another way, how far the clutch pedal is released).  For example, if the clutch is "dumped" or "side stepped" at the starting line with no feathering, this 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
would be called 100% Launch % Clutch.  If you release the clutch until it just starts to bring the engine RPM down, and you hold it there, that could be specified as perhaps 10% Launch % Clutch. 
This specification is disabled if the vehicle has a torque converter or you are using a computer driven launch.   This spec can also be used to simulate the hydraulic or pneumatic clutch management systems on funny cars or top fuel cars. 
Launch % Throttle 
This describes how far the throttle is opened during the Launch Time. The program then increases this amount until it is at 100% at the end of the Launch Time. 
If the throttle is immediately opened to wide open throttle (WOT), this would be specified as 100% Launch % Throttle.  "Trans brake" vehicles where the throttle is WOT but the transmission output is locked would also use 100%.  If the throttle is only opened to half throttle, this would be specified as 50% Launch % Throttle.   
This specification is used for both clutch and torque converter transmissions, but is disabled if you are using a computer driven launch which eliminates tire spin.    
Launch Time, sec 
Is the amount of time the clutch and throttle are "feathered" at the start of the run until the Launch % Clutch and Launch % Throttle reach 100%. In other words, this is the amount of time the Launch % Clutch and the Launch % Throttle are in effect. After this amount of time, the clutch is released completely (100%) and the throttle is opened to WOT (wide open throttle or 100%). 
This specification is disabled if you are using a computer driven launch. 
Launch Type 
Figure 2.21  Ramp vs Step Launch Type 
Click on arrow button to pick the type of transition from these 
Example of Throttle Opening 
launch specs to full power specs, either gradual (Ramp) or immediate (Step).  See Figure 2.21.
  Ramp                         Step 

Shift Specs 
Shift Time, sec 
Is the amount of time it takes the driver to shift.  This is the total time starting from the moment the clutch is disengaged to when the clutch pedal is released after the shift.  Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to select the time and description to best match your condition, or select “Set Time for Each Gear” to enable a Shift Time input for each shift. 
If the transmission has a torque converter, the program assumes this is the time required for the automatic transmission to shift.  Smooth shifting, production automatics are designed to take more shift time than race automatics. See Driving Specs Summary at the end of this section. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Shift % Throttle 
Is the amount of throttle given the engine during the shift process, in the same manner as specified under Launch % Throttle.  If the Shift % Throttle is specified as 100%, the throttle is held at WOT during the shift and the engine will rev up between shifts.  If the throttle is backed off between shifts (for example to 0% for the Shift % Throttle), the RPM will probably drop between shifts.   
This specification is disabled if the vehicle is specified with a torque converter.  The computer then assumes the throttle is held wide open (100% Shift % Throttle) during the shift. 
Shift Strategy 
Click on arrow button to pick whether the computer should pick good shift RPMs, or you want to specify the shift RPMs.  In the Team Engineer version you can also specify a time (from release of trans brake or clutch) to start of each shift, no matter what the RPM. 
Shift RPMs 
Click on the down arrow key of this combo box to select to either have the program pick the shift RPMs (recommended to make program easier to use) or have the program Use Specs Below.  If you select Use Specs Below, the Shift RPMs appropriate for the # of gears in the transmission become enabled. 
1-2 Shift RPM,  2-3 Shift RPM, .... 5-6 Shift RPM 
These are the RPMs at which the shifts take place.  For example, the 1-2 Shift RPM specifies the engine RPM in first gear when the 1-2 shift starts.  Note:  If the clutch is slipping when a shift RPM is reached, the computer will wait until both the engine and the clutch have reached the Shift RPM.  Therefore, occasionally the engine RPM in the results will be higher than the RPM specified for the shift.  Because these specs have a Clc button, you can have the program calculate optimum shift RPMs and fill them in into these specs.  See Section 2.8.18. 
1-2 Shift Time, sec, 2-3 Shift Time, sec, ... 5-6 Shift Time, sec 
If you selected “Set Time for Each Gear” for the Shift Time at the top of this section, these inputs become enabled so you can specify a different shift time for each gear.  For example a 2-3 shift on a production 4 speed is usually slower than the 1-2 or 3­4 shift. 
1-2 Start Time, sec, 2-3 Start Time, sec, ... 5-6 Start Time, sec 
In the Team Engineer version you have an option in Shift Strategy for Time.  Then these 5 specs become visible and enabled. These times are the time from release of the trans brake or clutch to when the appropriate shift starts.  
Driving Specs Summary: 
To summarize the driving specifications, the sequence of events for a run for different cases is illustrated below: 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Clutch, Launch Type:  Computer Driven-No tire spin 
1. The engine is held at the Launch RPM. 

by the Shift Time, the throttle is opened 100% and the clutch is again "feathered" to give maximum power to the tires without "breaking them loose". If you selected to Maintain Launch RPM, engine RPM is not allowed to fall below Minimum Launch RPM. 
4. 
The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run.  However, if you selected to Maintain Launch RPM, Engine RPM maintained at or above Launch RPM only in 1st gear.. 

5. 
The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run. 


Notes: 
The Launch Time starts the moment the clutch is released, not when the ET. clock starts. For example, if you specify Launch Time of 1 second, and the rollout required .2 seconds and Vehicle Response is .1 seconds, the Launch Time will be over at .7 seconds on the ET timer. See Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Clutch, Launch Type:  Use Specs Below 
1. The engine is held at the Launch RPM. 

gears are changed from 1st to 2nd, and when time has passed as specified by the Shift Time, the clutch is released 100% and the throttle is opened 100%. 
4. The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run. 
Notes: 
The Launch Time starts the moment the clutch is released, not when the ET. clock starts. For example, if you specify Launch Time of 1 second, and the rollout required .2 seconds and Vehicle Response is .1 seconds, the Launch Time will be over at .7 seconds on the ET timer. See Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
If the first shift takes place before the Launch Time is over, the clutch and throttle are still controlled per the Launch Specs into Gear 2 until the Launch Time has run out.    
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Torque Converter, Launch Type:  Computer Driven-No tire spin 
1. The engine is "brake torqued" at the converter's stall RPM.  Stall RPM is determined by the engine's available torque and the Converter Capacity.   

to 2nd.  The engine RPM drops as much as is required for the next transmission gear. The throttle remains open 100% during the shift and the drive axle's brakes are again "feathered" as required to put maximum power to the tires without allowing tire spin.   
4. The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run. Note: This method of launching will give the best possible ET. and MPH in most cases for the given vehicle specs and driving specs 
with a torque converter. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Torque Converter, Launch Type:  Use Specs Below 
1. The engine is "brake torqued" at the converter's stall RPM.  Stall RPM is determined by the engine's available torque (as 

reaches the 1-2 Shift RPM, the automatic shifts to 2nd.  The engine RPM drops as much as required for the next 
transmission gear.  The throttle remains open 100% during the shift. 
4. The third step is repeated for each transmission gear until the vehicle finishes the run. 
Notes: 
The Launch Time starts the moment the brake pedal or trans brake is released, not when the ET. clock starts. For example, if you specify Launch Time of 1 second, and the rollout required .2 seconds and Vehicle Response is .1 seconds, the Launch Time will be over at .7 seconds on the ET timer. See Rollout specs in Section 2.7.1. 
If the first shift takes place before the Launch Time is over, the throttle is still "feathered into Gear 2 until the Launch Time has run out. 
For automatic transmission shifts, the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro uses Shift Time to define how quickly the valve body can perform shifts.  During a shift, engine RPM drops and energy is released from this drop in engine RPM.  The program increases driveshaft torque to approximately simulate recovering the engine's and converter's inertia energy.  Inertia energy is the energy released when the engine and converter spinning at a high RPM before the shift are slowed down to a lower RPM after the shift.  This inertia energy is responsible for the vehicle's "jump forward" during shifts, possible spinning the tires. The shorter the Shift Time, the "harsher" the shift and the greater the driveshaft torque from recovering inertia energy. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.7 Calculate Performance 
2.7.1 Calculate Performance Conditions 
At the Main Menu, you can calculate performance by: 
1. 
Clicking on Calculate Performance to open the Calculate Performance Conditions menu shown below, then clicking on Calculate Performance (ET) at the top of this menu. 

2. 
Clicking on the Calc ET button at the top of the Main Menu. 

3. 
Clicking on the Calc ET menu item at the top of the Main Menu. 



(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
If you click on Calculate Performance, you will first be presented with a menu of conditions which describe how you will "run" this vehicle and what data will be recorded.  These conditions include: 
• 
Weather and wind conditions 

• 
Total track length, and other track details 

• 
How you "stage" your vehicle with respect to the "staging lights" 

• 
What data you want recorded in the Tabular Output. 

• 
Whether you want to perform any Special Calculations, which direct the program to do several calculations at once. 


Track Weather 
The weather conditions affect both the air's oxygen density which affects engine power, and the air's total density which affects aerodynamic drag.  Many drag racers use their own personal “weather stations”.  In these cases, be sure you read the Notes on Weather Conditions at the end of this section. 
Method of Recording Weather Data 
Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to be presented with this list of options: 
• 
Radio/TV Report with Rel Hum 

• 
Radio/TV Report with Dew Pt 

• 
Uncorr. Baro with Rel Hum 

• 
Uncorr. Baro with Dew Pt 

• 
Altimeter with Rel Hum 

• 
Altimeter with Dew Pt 


If you change the Method, the 4 inputs specs in the Weather section are changed or enabled/disabled as necessary to represent the new Method.  In addition, all the input specs are adjusted to what they would be with the new Method.  For example, Corr. Barometer of 29.3” at an elevation of 1200 feet is converted to 28.03” Obs Barometer with Elevation disabled.  (Elevation is not important when you are using an uncorrected or observed barometer, as this type of barometer shows the actual air pressure at the track.) 
If you change from “Uncorr Baro” to Radio/TV Report with a “Corr. Baro”, the program will ask for an Elevation for the track, since this is needed to make the Barometer Correction.  All these different inputs are explained below. 
Barometric Pressure 
Corr. Barometer, ''Hg 
This input is used for either “Radio/TV Report with Rel Hum” or “Radio/TV Report with Dew Pt”.  It is the Corrected Barometric Pressure in inches of Mercury you will hear from most any TV or radio weather report.  This spec is disabled if you are using an Altimeter, because the altimeter alone is measuring the air pressure.  
Obs. Barometer, ''Hg 
This input is used for either “Uncorr. Baro with Rel Hum” or “Uncorr. Baro with Dew Pt”.  It is the actual or observed Barometric Pressure in inches of Mercury at the track.  These barometers measure the actual air pressure at the track, and will read approximately .1 inches of mercury less than the barometric pressure you will hear from a TV or radio weather report for 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
each 100 feet of elevation. This spec is disabled if you are using an Altimeter, because the altimeter alone is measuring the air pressure. 
Air Temperature 
Air Temperature deg F 
Air temperature in degrees F of the air at the track.  This spec is used for all Methods of Recording Weather Data. 
Humidity 
Relative Humidity, % 
Describes the air’s humidity level in percent of humidity the air could hold at its present temperature. Relative Humidity can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from dew point and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.8.20. 
Dew Point, deg F 
The dew point in degrees F of the air at the track, which describes the air's humidity level.  The Dew Point, deg F must be less than the Air Temperature.  Dew Point can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from relative humidity and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.8.19. 
Dew Point is a less confusing way of describing the air's moisture level than relative humidity.  Relative humidity readings are only meaningful if the air temperature when the reading was made is also known.  However, the air's dew point remains constant even when the air temperature changes.  For example, 40 degree air with a 80 % relative humidity has only a 10% relative humidity when the same air is heated to 100 degrees.  However, the dew point remains at 36 degrees for both air temperatures. 
Elevation 
Elevation, ft 
The elevation of the track above sea level in feet.  This spec is only used if you are using a Corrected Barometer, like from a TV or radio station weather report. If the elevation is below sea level, enter a negative (-) feet for this reading. 
Altimeter 
The altitude in feet above sea level from an altimeter instrument.  The program assumes the altimeter is corrected to 29.92”.  This means on a standard 29.92” barometric pressure, 60 deg day, the altimeter would read 0 feet at sea level.  If the altimeter is reading feet below sea level, enter a negative (-) feet for this reading. 
Notes on Weather Readings and Weather Stations 
Many racers will use “weather stations”, a collection of temperature, humidity and barometric pressure measuring devices.  When using these instruments, here are some things to keep in mind: 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
• 
Unless you are very close to sea level, an actual (observed or uncorrected) barometer will usually read less than a TV or radio weather report barometer.  For elevations less than 5000 feet, an uncorrected barometer should read approximately 0.1 “ Mercury less for each 100 feet of elevation above sea level.  For example, if your barometer instrument is at 850 feet elevation and the closest weather station reports 30.46” barometric pressure, your barometer should read approximately .85” (850/100 x .1) less, or 30.46-.85= 29.61.  It is useful to keep records of information like this (what your actual barometer reads versus what this simple calculation says it should approximately read) to see if the comparison is constantly jumping around.  If you always make the check at the same place (same elevation) like your home or shop, and the difference is varying high by .1”, than low by .2”, etc., you may want to have the barometer or altimeter checked out. 

• 
If you find that you are making many adjustments to your weather station, you are probably doing something wrong. A barometer or altimeter which reads low, but consistently reads low is better for predicting throttle stop or dial in trends, than one you are trying to keep accurate by constantly adjusting. it. 

• 
Unless you are racing in very different air (at least 1000 ft different in dry density altitude), you are probably better off not changing jets.  Unless you know if you were on the rich side or lean side to start with, you may actually be making things worse.  Also, constant carb adjustments are just one more thing to go wrong and cause inconsistency. 


Wind Specs 
Wind Speed, MPH 
The wind speed in MPH.  Wind speed has a significant effect on ET and accurate measurements are difficult to come by.  You may want to invest in a hand held anemometer or vane wind speed indicator. 
Wind Direction 
Click on this combo box to select from the following wind directions.  Also see Figure 2.27. 
• 
Calm-No Wind 

• 
Head Wind 

• 
Tail Wind 

• 
Side Wind 

• 
Corner Head Wind 

• 
Corner Tail Wind 



Track Specs 
Track Length, ft 
Click on this combo box to select from the following track lengths: 
• 
1320 Quarter Mile 

• 
660 Eighth Mile 

• 
5280 One Mile 

• 
7040 El Mirage (1.33 mi) for top speed racing. 

• 
26400 Bonneville (5 mi) for top speed racing. 


If you select 1320 ft, the program also gives the MPH reading in the summary at the top as based on the 2 lights separated by 66 ft, just as official drag strips.  You will notice this MPH is slightly less than that listed in the results at 1320 ft. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
If you enter 7040 ft (the distance of El Mirage) or 26400 ft (the distance of Bonneville) you get readings at the standard distances for timing reports at these tracks.  Also, as you increase distance, the time increments of the plots gets larger, and the results get reported at larger distance intervals.  In the History Log, the 60 ft time is replaced by 1/8 mile time for 5280 and 7040, and by 2 mile time for 26400. 
Concrete Pad Len, ft 
Is the length of the concrete pad at the start of most drag strips.  The program assumes about 10% higher traction for this length of the track. 
Bump on Track 
Click on down arrow button to pick the severity of a bump on the track which may cause traction problems for some high powered cars.  Choose 'None' for no bump. 

Bump Distance, ft 
Is the location of the bump from the starting line.  This is disabled if Bump on Track above is set to None. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Rollout 
Rollout is the distance traveled by the vehicle during the process of uncovering the lights to start the ET timer during drag racing.  This distance is generally 4-12 inches and is affected by tire size, how the vehicle is "staged", timer light positions, etc. 
Rollout can be measured by measuring how far your vehicle travels from the following 2 points: 
1. 
When the "staged" light first comes on, assuming that is how you "stage" your car.  See Figure 2.29. 

2. 
When the "staged" light goes off (or whatever else starts the ET timer) from rolling forward through the beams. At most tracks, uncovering the "staged" light beam is what starts the ET timer.  See Figure 2.29. 


Although a few inches appears to be a minor detail, the rollout can affect the ET up to a couple tenths of a second.  If you want data reported where the timer starts the moment the vehicle starts accelerating (like accelerometer or fifth wheel instruments), enter a rollout distance of 0. 
Method 
Click on down arrow button to pick the method to tell the program the 'rollout' distance (the few inches the vehicle must travel to start the ET timer).  Choose 'None' to have the timer start the second the vehicle starts to move. 
Note:  For either of the “Estimate from Specs” Methods, the program uses specs from this section and the Front Tire Diameter from the Wheels & Tires specs screen to estimate a Rollout. 

Staging Depth, in 
Enter the amount of vehicle travel from when you first light the Staged Light until you stop and stage (how far into the lights you stage) in inches.  See Figure 2.29. 
Rollout, inches 
Enter the distance the vehicle moves in the process of uncovering the starting lights. 
Tire Stagger, in 
Click on the down arrow key to select how much stagger (the distance 1 wheel is ahead of the other wheel) in inches.  All production cars have 0; only purpose built drag cars have stagger. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Veh Response Time 
Click on the down arrow key to select a typical Vehicle Response Time (the time from release of the trans brake switch or clutch switch until the vehicle just starts to move).  This allows more precise timing of timed nitrous, throttle stops and shift timers. 
User Entered Veh Response Time 
If you selected to enter your own Vehicle Response Time, enter that time here, (the time from release of the trans brake switch or clutch switch until the vehicle just starts to move).   Note that there is no title on this box, it just appears to the left of the Vehicle Response Time choices. 
Data To Report 
The standard tabular data report includes rows of information at critical points during the run, like the shifts, 60, 330, 660 and 1000 feet,  60 MPH, etc.  For runs longer than a quarter mile (1320 feet), other points are reported.  However, advance users may want more conditions reported, like every 100 feet, or every 20 MPH interval, etc.  This section allows you to do this. 
Type 
Click on the down arrow key to the select the  number of Types of additional data to include in the report. 
Condition 
Click on the down arrow key to the select the data condition for triggering the reporting of output data.  For example, if you want data reported at every 10 MPH, select 'MPH' here. 
Starting At 
Enter the first value of the first condition for recording data.  For example, if you want MPH data recorded at every 20 MPH starting at 60 and going to 120, you would enter 60 here. 
Ending At 
Enter the last value of the first condition for recording data.  For example, if you want MPH data recorded at every 20 MPH starting at 60 and going to 120, you would enter 120 here. 
Step Size 
Enter the difference between successive points of the first condition for recording data.  For example, if you want MPH data recorded at every 20 MPH starting at 60 and going to 120, you would enter 20 here. 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 


2.7.2 Calculate Performance Test Results 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro's calculated output is shown in  Figure 2.30 below. 

Improvement Summary 
The Improvement Summary section compares the final results of the current run with those of the previous run.  This saves you from writing down ETs and MPHs to see how much effect a given modification has on performance. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
ET (Elapsed Time in Seconds) 
Is the time from when the vehicle's front tires uncover the "staged" light beam until the front tire breaks the finish line light beam at the end of the track.  Different tracks may have different locations and calculations regarding these light beams.  These differences may have some effect on the Rollout time but should have nearly no effect on ET. See Rollout in Section 2.7.1. 
If you have selected .001 second increments in the Preferences menu at the Main Menu, ET will be reported in thousandths of a second. 
MPH (Final Velocity in Miles per Hour) 
Is the vehicle's velocity at the end of the run in miles per hour. 
If you have selected 1320 Quarter Mile as the Track Length, the MPH will be the average velocity for the last 66 ft of the run. This MPH simulates standard drag strip MPH, which is based on the time it takes the vehicle to break a light beam 66 ft before the finish line, and the finish light beam at 1320 ft.  You will notice that this MPH is somewhat less than the MPH reported at 1320 ft in the tabular results.  For any other distance, MPH is the vehicle's speed exactly as it crosses the finish line. 
60 Ft (time) Timer (special timer for Team Engineer version only) 
Is the 60 ft time or time for the Special Timer condition if you have set this in the Team Engineer version. 
Improvement 
Improvement is simply the difference between the Current Run and the Last Run for which performance was calculated.   
 If the improvement is a positive value: 
• 
The Current Run’s 60 ft time was quicker (shorter) than the Last Run’s 

• 
The Current Run’s ET was quicker (shorter) than the Last Run’s 

• 
The Current Run’s MPH was faster (greater) than the Last Run's 

• 
The Current Run’s Special Timer time was quicker (shorter) than the Last Run’s 


Tabular Results 
The tabular results gives important vehicle and engine information at significant points during the run: 
• 
At the start of the run. 

• 
When the Rollout distance has been traveled (when the staged light is uncovered). 

• 
At the beginning and end of each shift. 

• 
At 60, 330, 660 and 1000 ft (Some tracks also give times for these distances.) 

• 
At 60 and 100 MPH. 

• 
At conditions specified by the user in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu under “Display Data At”. 


Occasionally, two of these conditions may occur very close together.  For example 60 MPH may occur a couple hundredths of a second before the start of the 1-2 shift at 5000 RPM.  In these cases, you may only get one reading, either the 60 MPH point or the start of the shift at 5000 RPM.  In these cases there may also be some slight error in reporting the results.  For example, if the 60 MPH point was reported, it may show engine RPM at 5047 for the start of the 1-2 shift, not the specified 5000 RPM. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
These errors produce insignificant errors in the overall MPH and ET.  These discrepancies are reduced if .001 second time in the Preferences menu is selected. 
The following section defines each data column: 
Gear 
Is the transmission Gear # currently being used.  An “RO” indicates the “rollout” condition, where the vehicle has moved the distance defined by Rollout.. 
If data is reported during a shift, both gear numbers are given.  For example, the 60 Feet point may show a Gear of "1-2", which indicates 60 feet occurred during the 1-2 shift. 
Time 
Shows the elapsed time since the Rollout distance was traveled.  If Rollout is specified as 0, this column shows the time since the vehicle first started to accelerate.  Negative values of Sec shows these conditions occurred before the Rollout distance was traveled.  For example, if the first Sec value is -.22 and the second value is 0 (Gear = RO), it says the vehicle started the acceleration .22 seconds before the rollout condition was met, which starts the ET timer.  See Rollout section in Section 2.7.1.
 If you want the timer to start the instant the vehicle starts to accelerate (not like a drag strip ET timer), select Rollout of 0 (like data logger). 
The resolution of the time column can be increased to thousandths of a second by selecting .001 second increments in the Preferences menu. 
MPH 
Is the vehicle's velocity in MPH. 
Accel Gs 
Is the vehicle's acceleration rate in Gs.  If the tires are spinning, the G value is followed by an S.  One (1) G is a rate of 22 MPH per second, and is the acceleration of gravity or the acceleration rate of a anything in free-fall.  If you accelerate at 1 G, you will be at 22 MPH in 1 second, 44 MPH in 2 seconds, etc. 
Feet 
Is the distance the vehicle has traveled during the run, measured in feet. 
C RPM 
Is the clutch or converter output RPM.  See EngRPM below. 
EngRPM 
Is the engine RPM.  The difference between CRPM and EngRPM is the amount the clutch or converter is slipping.  If the clutch is not slipping, CRPM will be equal to EngRPM. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
TqMult 
The amount of torque multiplication which is produced in the torque converter or clutch.  A value of 1.5 indicates that the output of the torque converter is 1.5 times as large as the torque which entered it.  If the engine can output 300 ft-lbs, the torque converter will increase it to 450 ft-lbs.  See torque converter explanation in the Assumptions, Appendix 1. 
If the vehicle is equipped with a clutch, this value is 1. 
C Slip 
Is the amount of clutch or converter slip occurring, in percent. 
Eng HP 
Is the amount of engine HP available, considering current engine RPM, weather, hood scoop effects, nitrous oxide injection, etc. 
% Thrt 
Is the percent of the engine’s HP being allowed to be delivered to the clutch or converter.  This will be reduced from 100% to prevent tire spin, as directed by the Launch % Throttle, or as directed by the Shift % Throttle. 
T Slip 
Is the amount of slip in the tires, in percent.  All tires show some slip during acceleration, even if they do not “break loose”.  If the tires are slipping excessively (“broken loose”), T Slip% is shown as 100% and an “S” appears in the Accel Gs column. 
Tr Wt 
The percent of the vehicle's weight on the driving tires, the tires producing traction.  This is the same as the % Weight on Rear Tires with no acceleration, but then is affected by weight transfer, aerodynamic effects, etc. 
Str Wt 
The percent of the vehicle's weight on the steering (front) tires.  This is affected by weight transfer, aerodynamic effects, etc.  
Safety Tip:  Low numbers for Str Wt indicate potential difficulty and loss in steering control! 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.8 Calculation Menus 
The following section explains the user input for engine specs listed with Clc buttons.  These specs are ones where you can simply enter a value, or click on the Clc button and the program will present a menu of inputs which will calculate that particular parameter.  These menus are like computer “scratch pads” for calculating specs like Final Drive Ratio, Tire 
Diameter, etc. from other inputs. 
Notes: 
The starting values in each calculation menu are usually blanked out when the menu is opened.  If there is other information in the program to estimate what one of your input values will be, it may be loaded.  As shown in Figure 2.31, Vehicle Weight, Engine Cubic Inches and RPM at HP Peak are already available from other menus in the program, and these values are loaded into the Calculation Menu.  You are free to change them to any other value. 
Once enough specs have been entered, the calculated value(s) at the top of the menu will be displayed.  This calculated value(s) will now be updated each time you change a spec.  If you want to use this calculated value, click on Use Calc Value. If the calculated value is within expected limits, it will be loaded into the original menu.  If you click on Cancel, you will be returned to the original menu with the original value unchanged.  If you click on Help, you will be given a general explanation of calculation menus, and a page # in this section for more info about the particular menu you are using. 
The input values or calculated values in any calculation menu have NO affect on calculated performance unless you load the Calculated value into the original menu.  If you already know a spec in the form required by the program, then you have no need to use the calculation menu.  For example, if you know the engine makes 420 ft lbs at 4500 and 450 HP at 6000 RPM, then, you have no need to use a calculation menu to calculate Peak Tq and Peak HP. 

Example 
Assume you want to calculate Peak Torque and Peak Horsepower for your car, but you know very little about the engine.  You could click on one of the Clc buttons by Peak Torque or Peak Horsepower in the Engine Specs menu.  You will be presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.31. 
Vehicle Weight, Engine Cubic Inches and RPM at HP Peak are already available from other menus in the program, and these values are already loaded into the Calculation Menu.  Vehicle Weight and Cubic Inches are accurate for your engine and vehicle so you leave them “as is”.  However, RPM at HP Peak you are not sure of and you may change this. 
Note that all inputs are disabled except Type of Calc.  Select the Type of Calc from this Combo box.  Since you do know your quarter mile MPH, select Quarter Mile MPH. 
All specs except Vol Eff are now enabled (printed in black, not gray). All you have to do is enter your Quarter Mile MPH of 121 and press <Enter>.  You now see the calculated Peak HP, Peak Torque and Peak Torque RPM at the top of the menu. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
You would be ready to Use Calc Values if the RPM at Peak HP was correct.  From reading in this section, you see that a good estimate of RPM at Peak HP is about 500 RPM less than the RPM you shift at or go through the traps at.  So you decide to adjust that up to 5500 RPM.  You see Peak HP stay the same but Peak Torque and Peak Torque RPM updated to new, more accurate readings. 
If you click on Cancel, you will return to the Engine Specs menu with the Power Curve specs unchanged.  If you click on Use Calc Value, you will be returned to the Engine Specs menu with the Calculated Peak HP, Peak Torque, Peak HP RPM and Peak Torque RPM filled in. 
2.8.1 Calc Displacement 
This calculation is available from the Engine specs menu and lets you estimate a set of engine Power Curve specs.  Initiate this calculation by entering a Clc button for any engine Power Curve spec or the Calculate button if you are using a Full Power Curve, for this menu. 
This menu is available by clicking on the Displacement Clc button in the Engine Specs menu.  When enough inputs have been entered, it shows Displacement in Cubic Inches (which can be transferred back to the Engine Specs menu by clicking on Use Calc Value), Cubic Centimeters and Liters. 
Calc Based On 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Bore and Stroke 

• 
CCs 

• 
Liters Depending on your choice certain inputs will now be enabled. 


Bore, inches 
Is the Bore for this engine.  Bore is the diameter of one cylinder. 
Stroke, inches 
Is the Stroke for this engine.  Stroke is the distance the piston travels from TDC to BDC. 
# Cylinders  

Is the number of cylinders in this engine.  For example, for a V-8 this would be 8. 
Displacement in CCs 
Is the total engine displacement in cubic centimeters (CCs) that you want converted to cubic inches.  For example, for a 1000 CC motorcycle engine, enter 1000. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Displacement in Liters 
Is the total engine displacement in liters that you want converted to cubic inches.  For example, for a 5.0L Mustang engine, enter 5. 

2.8.2 Calc Power Curve 
This calculation is available from the Engine specs menu and lets you estimate a set of engine Power Curve specs.  Initiate this calculation by entering a Clc button for any engine Power Curve spec or the Calculate button if you are using a Full Power Curve, for this menu. 
Peak HP Peak Torque, ft lbs Peak Torque RPM 
Are the values calculate from these inputs. 
If you select Quarter Mile or Eighth Mile MPH as the Type of Calc, Peak HP is calculated from a simple equation relating only vehicle weight and finish MPH to available HP.  Note that these Engine Power Curve specs may not give the same performance (quarter mile or eighth mile MPH) when coupled with your particular vehicle specifications. 
If you select CID and Vol Eff, the Peak HP value is calculated using the following assumptions: 
• 
85% mechanical efficiency at RPM at HP Peak 

• 
35% thermal efficiency 

• 
Gasoline as the fuel with an energy content of 19,000 BTU/lb 

• 
Dry air density of .0764 lbs/cu ft 


The other Power Curve specs are derived from Peak HP and RPM at HP Peak and an assumed shape of the torque curve based on the Cubic Inches. The RPM at HP Peak input at the bottom of the menu is always loaded back into the Engine specs menu. 
These calculations are based on power corrected to the standard aftermarket dyno correction factor of 29.92” mercury and 60 degrees dry air.  Therefore, anytime you use values from this menu, the Corr Factor in the Engine menu will be set to Std Dyno 
(29.92 and 60 deg) 
Type of Calc 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Quarter Mile MPH 

• 
Eighth Mile MPH 

• 
CID and Vol Eff 


Depending on your choice certain inputs will now be enabled. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Vehicle Weight, lbs 
Is the vehicle's total weight including driver, in pounds.  This is initially set to the Vehicle Weight in the Body & Axle menu, but can be changed to anything you want. 
Quarter Mile MPH Eighth Mile MPH 
Is the vehicle's top speed in a standing start, quarter mile or eighth mile acceleration. 
Engine Cubic Inches 
Is the engine’s size in Cubic Inches. This is initially set to the Displacement in the Engine menu, but can be changed to anything you want. 
Vol Eff 
Is the engine's volumetric efficiency at the HP peak.  Volumetric efficiency means what is the amount of air which this engine pulls in one cycle compared to how much it could under “ideal” conditions.  Generally this is less than 100%, but can be up to 130% for highly tuned race engines, or up to 300% on supercharged or turbocharged engines. Generally, this is not the engine's peak volumetric efficiency (which usually occurs at the torque peak) but is close to it. 
Click on the down arrow of this combo box to select from the following choices: 
• 
65 Bad Production 

• 
75 Typ Production 

• 
80 Good Production 

• 
85 HiPerf Production 

• 
90  Poor Street/Strip 

• 
95  Typ Street/Strip 

• 
100 Good Street/Strip 

• 
110 Good Race Engine 

• 
115 Very Good Race Engine 

• 
120 Excellent Race Engine • 125 Pro Stock/Formula 1 

• 
90 Prod, 5 PSI Boost 


Abbreviations:  Prod is Production or Stock, 
•  100 Prod, 10 PSI Boost  •  130 Good Race, 10 PSI Boost  
•  110 Prod, 15 PSI Boost  •  145 Good Race, 15 PSI Boost  
•  120 Prod, 20 PSI Boost  •  160 Good Race, 20 PSI Boost  
•  95  HiPrf Prod, 5 PSI Boost  •  140 Exc Race, 10 PSI Boost  
•  110 HiPrf Prod, 10 PSI Boost  •  170 Exc Race, 20 PSI Boost  
•  125 HiPrf Prod, 15 PSI Boost  •  200 Exc Race, 30 PSI Boost  
•  135 HiPrf Prod, 20 PSI Boost  •  225 Exc Race, 40 PSI Boost  
•  105 Strt/Strp, 5 PSI Boost  •  250 Exc Race, 50 PSI Boost  
•  120 Strt/Strp, 10 PSI Boost  •  270 Exc Race, 60 PSI Boost  
•  135 Strt/Strp, 15 PSI Boost  •  285 Exc Race, 70 PSI Boost  
•  145 Strt/Strp, 20 PSI Boost  •  300 Exc Race, 80 PSI Boost  
•  115 Good Race, 5 PSI Boost  

   HiPrf is High Performance Production, like Modern Corvette or BMW M series, 
Strt/Strp is Street and Strip, Exc is Excellent or Expertly Built.  
RPM at HP Peak 
Is the RPM at which the HP peak occurs. This is initially set to the RPM at HP Peak in the Engine menu, but can be changed to anything you want. 
Note:  Most any modification which increases HP (other than nitrous oxide or super/turbocharging) will also increase RPM at HP Peak.  If you have no information about your RPM at HP Peak, use an RPM 500 RPM lower than your shift RPM.  This RPM input is always loaded back into the Engine specs menu. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.8.3 Hood Scoop Efficiency Calc Hood Scoop Effcy, % 
Is the new Hood Scoop Efficiency based on the inputs in this menu.  To make this calculation you must do a test on your car.  You must be able to measure the pressure in the hood scoop before it gets to the carb with the vehicle traveling at a high speed.  Figure 2.35 shows how you can make a water manometer to measure this pressure out of a piece of clear tubing. 
These are the current specs in the Calculate Performance conditions menu for Track Weather Conditions.  They are listed for information only, and can not be changed in this menu. 
Weather conditions do have a minor impact on this calculation.  For those who want the most accuracy, set the weather conditions in the Calculate Performance conditions menu to those when you did the vehicle test for inputs to this menu.  Otherwise leave these specs "as is" for accuracy sufficient for most situations. 

Vehicle Speed, MPH 
Is the vehicle's speed when you recorded the hood scoop pressure. 
Scoop Pressure, '' water 
Is the pressure you measured in the hood scoop, in " water.  This pressure should be measured in a "dead air" zone, away from carb air flow, the scoop's entrance or any potential leak areas in the scoop.  If you measure this with a data logger, calculate inches of water from these other common pressure units before entering the Scoop Pressure 

Multiply Inches Mercury by 13.6 to obtain Inches of Water. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.8.4 Engine Inertia, lb ft^2 
Is the Engine Inertia calculated from the inputs in this menu.  This inertia includes the base engine, front end components, and what is bolted to the back of the crankshaft, either flywheel/clutch assembly or torque converter/flex plate. 
The note at the bottom of this screen shows the cubic inches entered in the main Engine Specs screen.  This is used to estimate the inertia of the base engine.  If this is not correct, Cancel out of this screen and correct it before calculating Engine Inertia. 
If you can not make good estimates of these inputs, it is much better to select “Let Program Estimate” for Engine Inertia in the Engine Details screen. 
Accessories 
Select a description of the front end accessories that are driven from the crank pulley. 
Internal Parts 
Race engine's are generally equipped with lighter components like crank, pistons, rods, etc.  This is done both to reduce engine inertia and to survive higher RPM running.  Pick a description of the internal components of this engine 
Engine Stroke, in 
Enter the engine’s stroke in inches. 
Crank Weight 
Weight of the crankshaft in pounds. 
Damper Diameter, in 
Is the outside diameter of the crankshaft damper. 
Damper Wt, lbs 
Is the weight of the crankshaft damper. 
Flywheel Diameter, in 
Is the outside diameter of the flywheel. 
Flywheel Wt, lbs 
Is the weight of the flywheel. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Pressure Plate Diameter, in 
Is the outside diameter of the Pressure Plate. 
Pressure Plate Wt, lbs 
Is the weight of the Pressure Plate and clutch disk. 
Converter Specs 
If the Transmission Specs currently are indicating a torque converter is installed, the Flywheel and Pressure Plate specs are converted to Converter specs. 
Converter Diameter, in 
Is the outside diameter of the torque converter. 
Conv. Wt.  with Fluid, lbs 
Is the weight of the converter with fluid.  If you do not know this weight, assume 10 lbs for a 7" converter, 15 lbs for a 9" converter, and 20 lbs for an 11" converters.  This spec is marked "na" if you specify a Clutch. 
2.8.5 Total Carb CFM Rating Total # Primary Throttles 
The total # of primary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 2. 
Primary Throttle Plate Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter. 
Total # Secondary Throttles 
The total # of secondary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 4. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Secondary Throttle Plate Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Sec Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter.  If Total # Sec. Throttle Plates is set to 0, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
Note:  Primary barrels and secondary barrels are not treated any differently by the program.  The only reason they are divided here is to easily handle throttle plates which are different sizes.  For example, if the primary and secondary throttles were the same size in the three 2 barrel examples above, you could have used 6 Pri Barrels, 0 Sec Barrels or 0 Pri Barrels, 6 Sec Barrels and arrived at the same answer. 
2.8.6 Carb % Closed Total # Primary Throttles 
The total # of primary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 2. 
Primary Throttle Plate Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter. 
Total # Secondary Throttles 
The total # of secondary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 4. 
Secondary Throttle Plate Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Sec Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter.  If Total # Sec. Throttle Plates is set to 0, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
Note:  Primary barrels and secondary barrels are not treated any differently by the program.  The only reason they are divided here is to easily handle throttle plates which are different sizes. For example, if the primary and secondary throttles were the same size in the three 2 barrel examples above, you could have used 6 Pri Barrels, 0 Sec Barrels or 0 Pri Barrels, 6 Sec Barrels and arrived at the same answer. 
When Throttle Stop is On: 
Primary Throttle Angle 
Is the angle of the primary throttle plates when the throttle stop comes on, where fully open is 90 degrees and fully closed is 0 degrees.  This is difficult to measure exactly and will likely be an estimate. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Secondary Throttle Angle 
Is the angle of the secondary throttle plates when the throttle stop comes on, where fully open is 90 degrees and fully closed is 0 degrees.  This is difficult to measure exactly and will likely be an estimate. 
2.8.7 Centrifugal (Clutch) Force, lbs 
Click on the Clc button by Centrifugal Force in the Transmission Specs screen (if you have specified a Racing Centrifugal Clutch).  The screen of figure 2.x appears asking for the desired lockup RPM.  Enter an RPM and the program will try to find a Centrifugal Force which produces this lockup RPM.  Note that an answer may not be found, for example if the static force alone produces lockup at all RPMs. 
2.8.8 Est Vehicle Weight  
This menu is available by clicking on the Vehicle Weight Clc button in the Body & Axle specs menu.  This screen provides only an estimated vehicle weight, and should only be used if you can not weight the vehicle. 
Vehicle Specs 
   Year 
   Make
   Model
   Engine 
   Transmission 
   Convertible 
Click on these combo boxes to describe your vehicle.  The program search its data base to see if a good match can be found.  If not, the Notes section at the bottom will state the closest match available in the data base.  Then you will have to decide yourself if this providing a good enough estimate.  If its not a good match, click on cancel to return to the Body & Axle screen. 
These specs will estimate the weight of the vehicle without the driver or any fuel in the tank. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Additional Weight 
Driver Weight, lbs 
Enter the driver’s weight in pounds. 
Gallons of Fuel 
Enter the gallons of fuel in the tank.  The program calculates pounds from this based on the density of gasoline.  The density of alcohol and diesel fuel are close enough for this to be a good estimate of those fuel weights also. 
2.8.9 Calc Final Drive Ratio 
This menu is available by clicking on the Final Drive Ratio Clc button in the Body & Axle specs menu. 
Type 
Click on this combo box to select from: 
• 
Ring & Pinion Gear Only (typical of most rear wheel drive rear axles) 

• 
Chain Drive Only (typical of go carts, most motorcycles, etc.) 

• 
Primary Ratio & Chain Drive  (typical of motorcycles where there is a chain reduction between the engine and the transmission, and then there is the chain ratio between the transmission and rear axle.)  Select this option if you know the Primary Ratio. 

• 
Primary Gears & Chain Drive. Select this option if you know the number of gear teeth in the Primary Reduction. 


Depending on your choice certain inputs will now be enabled. 
# Teeth, Pinion Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the smaller pinion gear (or drive gear which attaches to the driveshaft) in the rear axle.  If you selected Gear Reduction & Chain Drive as the Type, this is the # teeth on the sprocket or drive gear on the engine’s crankshaft.  In almost all cases, this number will be smaller than # Teeth Ring Gear. 
# Teeth, Ring Gear 
This is the number of teeth on the larger ring gear (or driven gear which attaches to the axle shafts through the differential) in the rear axle. If 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
you selected Gear Reduction & Chain Drive as the Type, this is the # teeth on the sprocket or drive gear on the transmission input shaft or clutch shaft.  In almost all cases, this number will be larger than # Teeth Pinion Gear. 
# Teeth, Drive Sprocket 
This is the number of teeth on the smaller drive sprocket on the engine or transmission for chain drive systems.  In almost all cases, this number will be smaller than # Teeth Wheel Sprocket. 
# Teeth, Wheel Sprocket 
This is the number of teeth on the larger driven sprocket on the wheel or axle for chain drive systems. In almost all cases, this number will be larger than # Teeth Drive Sprocket. 
2.8.10 Calc % Wt on Rear Tires 
This calculation is available from the Body & Axle Specs menu and allows you to calculate a vehicle's weight distribution. 
Total Vehicle Weight, lbs 
Is the total vehicle weight with driver as measured on a scale.  This initially set to the Vehicle Weight in the Body and Axle specs menu, but can be changed to anything. 
Weight on 1 Axle 
Is the weight recorded on the scale with the driver when only one axle's tires are on the scale, either front or rear tires. 
Which Axle? 
Click on the combo box to choose either Rear or Front, to identify which axle was on the scale for the Weight on 1 Axle measurement. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.7.11 Calc C.G. Height 

This menu is available by clicking on the C.G. Height Clc button in the Body & Axle specs menu.   
The procedure to determine C.G. height requires one end of the car to be raised while accurately measuring the wheel weights on the other end of the car before and after the car is raised.  The suspension must be blocked so the springs do not compress during the process.  This can be done by replacing the shocks with solid links that maintain the vehicle’s free standing height. 
• Do the entire test more than once and average the C.G. height results. 
This procedure can be dangerous if not done with care and using good equipment. Take the proper precautions, especially if you raise the car significantly. 
Wheelbase, in 
Wheelbase of the car in inches, from front wheel hub to rear wheel hub. 
Total Vehicle Weight, lbs 
The total weight of the vehicle, ideally with simulating the driver weight and all fluid levels at race conditions. 
Total Front (Rear) Weight, lbs 
The weight on the front tires (or rear tires if the front of the car is raised) on level ground in pounds, before the car is raised. 
Raise Front or Rear 

Choose which end of the car is raised for this test, usually the rear. 
Front (Rear) Tire Radius, in 
The radius of the front tire (or rear tire if the front of the car is raised). 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Distance Raised, in 
The distance the one end of the car is raised, in inches. 
New Total Front (Rear) Weight, lbs 
The new weight on the front tires (or rear tires if the front of the car is raised) when the car has been raised. 
2.8.12 Calc Frontal Area 
This calculation is available from the Body & Axle Specs menu and allows you to estimate a vehicle's frontal area. 
Track Width, inches 
Is the distance from the center of one front tire to the center of the other front tire.  This value is initially set to the Rear Track Width in the Body and Axle specs menu, but can be changed to most anything you want. 
Roof Height, inches 
The distance in inches from the ground to highest portion of the roof or vehicle in inches which extends nearly the full width of the vehicle. 
For example, for a truck with a roll bar behind the cab, measure to the top of the roll bar, but not to the top of one of the spot lights mounted on the bar.  However, if so many lights are mounted on the bar that they are nearly continuous for the full width of the vehicle, it may be more accurate to then measure to the top of the spot lights. 

2.8.13 Calc Drag Coefficient 
This calculation is available from the Body & Axle Specs menu and allows you to estimate a vehicle's drag coefficient from measured data or from estimated power losses. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 

Based On 
First, select the method for estimating Drag Coefficient from the following: 
• 
Time coasting (from measurements) 

• 
Decel Gs (from measurements) 

• 
Aero Drag Force, lbs 

• 
Aero Drag HP 

• 
Total Drag Force, lbs 

• 
Total Drag HP 

The data for the first 2 methods can be obtained from data logger measurements.  It should be noted that if you do make measurements from a vehicle, that is should be: 

• 
With the weather conditions currently entered in the Calculate Performance Conditions. 

• 
With the Frontal Area currently entered in the Body & Axle specs. 

• 
On a very level stretch of track. 

• 
On a very calm day, with no head wind, tail wind or side wind. 

• 
At relatively high MPH.  If your finish MPH is 150 MPH, you should measure data at something over 100 MPH.  Accurate aerodynamic data can not be obtained at less than around 80 MPH. 

• 
With just the vehicle rolling itself, with just wind resistance slowing it down.  That means no brakes, no engine braking (clutch disengaged), no parachute, etc. 


Safety Note:  Making measurements at high vehicle speed is dangerous without proper precautions.  It is recommended these measurements only be taken at the end of the run with a data logger for a few seconds so there is ample time to safely brake the car. 
Time coasting (from measurements) 
For this method, enter the Vehicle MPH at the start of the coasting, a 2nd Slower Veh MPH which is the MPH at the end of the coasting period, and the Time measured between the 2 MPHs.  This can be obtained with a stop watch, or by analyzing data logger data at the end of a run (noting the precautions above listed under “Based On”.  The time between measurements does not have to be long, but can be as short as a couple seconds if the MPH measurements are accurate (from a data logger).  This method will estimate a portion of the deceleration is coming from rolling resistance of the tires, wheel bearings, etc. 
Decel Gs (from measurements) 
For this method, enter the Vehicle MPH and decel Gs at some relatively high MPH coasting after the run (noting the precautions above listed under “Based On”. This method will estimate a portion of the deceleration is coming from rolling resistance of the tires, wheel bearings, etc. 
Aero Drag Force, lbs Aero Drag HP 
Drag Coefficient from these methods will be based on you entering some theoretical Force in pounds or HP that the vehicle’s aerodynamic drag (and only aerodynamic drag) must overcome. This method assumes all the Force or HP you enter goes into overcoming aerodynamic drag, and none into rolling resistance of the tires, wheel bearings, etc. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Total Drag Force, lbs Total Drag HP 
Drag Coefficient from these methods will be based on you entering some theoretical Force in pounds or HP that the vehicle’s aerodynamic drag and rolling resistance must overcome. This method will estimate a portion of the deceleration is coming from rolling resistance of the tires, wheel bearings, etc. 
2.8.14 Calc Front/Rear Lift Coefficient 
This calculation is available from the Body & Axle Specs menu and allows you to estimate a vehicle's front or rear lift coefficient from measured data.  As with the Drag Coefficient calculation, measurements from the vehicle should be: 
• 
With the weather conditions currently entered in the Calculate Performance Conditions. 

• 
With the Frontal Area currently entered in the Body & Axle specs. 

• 
On a very level stretch of track. 

• 
On a very calm day, with no head wind, tail wind or side wind. 

• 
At relatively high MPH.  If your finish MPH is 150 MPH, you should measure data at something over 100 MPH.  Accurate aerodynamic data can not be obtained at less than around 80 MPH. 

• 
With just the vehicle rolling itself, with just wind resistance slowing it down.  That means no brakes, no engine braking 


(clutch disengaged), no parachute, etc. 
Body Creates 
First, select whether the body is creating downforce or lift on the appropriate front or rear axle.  
Vehicle MPH 
Enter the vehicle speed in MPH where you have force data on the axle. 
Downforce On Axle, lbs 
Enter the force you measure on the axle.  The most straight forward way to measure this force is with shock absorber or spring travel sensors.  For example, assume you see a .200” compression in the left and right rear shocks.  Then while the car is standing in the garage, apply load directly above the rear axle until the shocks have compressed .200”.  This is the downforce you would enter into the calculation menu.  Note, that to be accurate you must apply the force directly above the axle, not at the end of the car (like pressing or lifting on the rear bumper). 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.8.15 Tire Diameter    Tread Width 
This calculation is available from the Wheel & Tire Specs menu and allows you to estimate either a front or rear wheel’s Tire Diameter and Tread Width for certain Tire Rating Types. 
Note:  For all Rating Types except Rolling Radius, the Calc Tire Diameter is approximately 3% less than what you would calculate based on the exact dimensions.  This is to allow for some tire wear, deformation, and slip. 
Rating Type 
Click on this combo box for the following rating types: 
• 
P-Metric (ex P225-60-15) 

• 
Letter (ex G-60-15) 

• 
Rolling Radius, inches 

• 
Circumference, inches 


Depending on your choice, certain specs will become enabled.  If you choose the P-Metric or Letter Type, you will also be able to calculate the Tread Width. 
Metric Tire Size (ex 225) 

Identifies the tire's cross sectional width in millimeters and is also related to the tire's load carrying capacity. 
Letter Tire Size 
Identifies the tire's load carrying capacity.  Click on this combo box to select on of the letters.  This is an older rating system and there is more variation across manufacturer's. 

Aspect Ratio 
Is the ratio of tire cross sectional height to cross sectional width.  A 75 series tire has a height 75% as high as its cross sectional width, and is generally a tall tire.  A 50 series tire is a lower profile tire, more suited to cornering and performance. 
Wheel Rim Diameter 
Is the diameter of the wheel's rim. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Rolling Radius, in 
Is the tire's radius, measured with the tire mounted on the car, with the tire on the ground with typical vehicle weight on  it.  Radius is the distance from the center of the tire to the ground.  See Figure 2.26 Note that this is the only calculation where the diameter is not reduced by 3%, because the load is already deforming the tire.  This is usually the most accurate way to Calculate the Tire Diameter. 
Circumference, in 
Is the tire's circumference measured in inches.  Circumference is the distance around the outside of the tire on the tread. 
2.8.16 Estimated Traction Factors 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Traction Factor Clc button  in the Wheel/Tire menu.  Click on the combo box to be presented with the following choices: 
• 
110 Best Possible Suspension Setup & Track 

• 
100 Best Drag Strip with Traction Compound 

• 
95   Good Drag Strip with Traction Compound 

• 
90   Tire on Good Concrete 

• 
85   Tire on Average Concrete 

• 
80   Tire on Good Asphalt 

• 
75 Tire on Average Asphalt 


This menu is different than other Calculation menus in that there is no calculation performed, but you are simply picking a Traction Factor from a list of descriptions.  
The Traction Factors in this list are very general.  You will probably have to fine tune this spec based on your vehicle's actual 60 ft times.  The program can also determine Traction Factor with the Match Vehicle Performance command at the Main Menu. 
2.8.17 Estimated Tire Growth 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Traction Factor Clc button  in the Wheel/Tire menu.  Click on the combo box to be presented with descriptive choices for drag slicks.  This menu is different than most Calculation menus in that no calculations are performed, but you are simply picking a Tire Growth from a list of descriptions.  
The Traction Factors in this list are very general.  You will probably have to fine tune this spec based on your vehicle's actual 60 ft times.  The program can also determine Tire Growth with the Match Vehicle Performance command at the Main Menu. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.8.18 Calculated Shift RPMs 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Shift RPMs Clc button  in the Driving Specs menu.  There are no inputs to this menu.  You are simply telling the program to calculate what it would use for Shift RPMs.  As Figure 2.51 shows, you can then choose to use (load in) these Calculated Shift RPMs. 

2.8.19 Calc Dew Point, deg F 
Depending on your choice of Method of Recording Weather Data, you will be entering either Dew Point or Relative Humidity in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu or in the Throttle Stop or Dial In menus.  These humidity inputs at all these menus have a Clc button.  This is the Calculation Menu you will get if you are using Dew Point.      
Know Relative Humidity? 
If you know the relative humidity of the air and the air temperature, select Yes.  Otherwise select No to input Wet and Dry bulb temperatures from a psychrometer.  Depending on your choice the appropriate inputs are enabled. 
Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the relative humidity measurement was made.  For example, if the weather service or weather report gives a relative humidity of 56 % and a temperature of 68 degrees, use 68 degrees. 
Outside Rel Humidity, % 
Is the air's relative humidity as reported by a weather service or measured by humidity instruments. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken. The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Wet Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  Relative humidity or dew point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart.  The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. 
2.8.20 Relative Humidity, % 
Depending on your choice of Method of Recording Weather Data, you will be entering either Dew Point or Relative Humidity in the Calculate Performance Conditions menu or in the Throttle Stop or Dial In menus.  These humidity inputs at all these menus have a Clc button.  This is the Calculation Menu you will get if you are using Relative Humidity.      
Know Dew Point? 
If you know the dew point of the air and the air temperature, select Yes.  Otherwise select No to input Wet and Dry bulb temperatures from a psychrometer.  Depending on your choice the appropriate inputs are enabled. 
Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the Dew Point measurement was made. 
Dew Point, deg F 
Is the air's Dew Point in degrees F as reported by a weather service or measured by humidity instruments. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken. The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp. 

Wet Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Relative humidity or dew point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart.  The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.9 Match Vehicle Performance 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro will automatically 'fine tune' certain critical specs to match a particular vehicle's performance. See Example 4.2.  The Match Vehicle Performance process consists of: 
1. You set all specs (Engine, Transmission, etc)  to match the vehicle you are trying to simulate as close as practical.  
This is very important for accurate results. 
2. 
Click on the Match Veh Perf button at the top of the Main Menu to bring up the Match Vehicle Performance menu shown in Figure 2.54. 

3. 
Fill in the Match Vehicle Performance menu with the vehicle's performance.  Then click on  OK (adjust veh. specs to match performance) to start the process. 

4. 
The program will adjust: 


• 
Engine Power Curve 

• 
Torque Converter Capacity or will switch the clutch specs to “Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs” if the clutch is too small for the Engine Power Curve. 

• 
Tire Traction Factor 

• 
Tire Construction, if it needs more traction than 110% Traction Factor can provide 

• 
Tire Growth 

• 
Tire Diameter To find a combination giving the closest match to the vehicle's performance. 


If the program can not arrive at acceptable specs in 100 passes down the track, it will give you a notice.  You may then want to double check your entries in the Match Veh Perf menu or some of the other specs in the other menus. 
If the program does arrive at acceptable specs, you will be shown a summary of the new specs the program found and how close the program matched performance, as shown in Figure 2.55.  You can then load these specs into the menus for this vehicle. 
This process can save a good deal of "cut and try" on your part to get your vehicle specs adjusted.  Example 4.2 shows the Match Vehicle Performance process in more detail. 
Distance of Race 
Select either Quarter or Eighth mile for the distance of the race you are trying to match.  This Match Vehicle Performance option is not available for other run distances. 
Stall RPM at Launch 
Enter the converter's stall RPM during the launch.  Stall RPM is the highest RPM you see on the tach or data logger with the throttle wide open but the back tires not turning.  This occurs with the trans brake ON, or before the car has had a chance to move off the line.  If you have chosen “Comp Drvn-No tire spin (set Start RPM)” as the Launch Type, then Stall RPM is the RPM the program “sees” 0.3 seconds into the run.  The program assumes at this point the engine should be close to Stall RPM and the tires are still basically not turning. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
This spec is not enabled if the Transmission Specs indicate a clutch is being used. 
60 foot time 
The vehicle's 60 ft time from the track's timer. 
Finish MPH 
The vehicle's MPH at the end of the run (either eighth or quarter mile).  This is sometimes called "trap speed" or speed through the "traps". 
Finish Engine RPM 
The engine's RPM at the end of the run, or at the same time when Finish MPH is recorded.  If you are not sure of this RPM, or you do not want the Tire Diameter adjusted, leave this spec blank or set it to zero. 
Finish Trans Gear # 
The transmission gear at the end of the run, or at the same time when Finish MPH is recorded. 

More details 
Know Another RPM 
Choose either Axle or Driveshaft to be able to enter a finish RPM for either of these 2 components.  Then the Axle RPM or Driveshaft RPM data can be entered below. This data is most accurate if measured from a data logger.  If you do not have a data logger, choose None to not have the Match Vehicle Performance calculation consider this additional information. 
Axle RPM Driveshaft RPM 
Enter the appropriate information for either of these RPMs as the car finishes the run. This data is most accurate if measured from a data logger. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.10 Throttle Stop Prediction 
A throttle stop is a throttle activator which closes the throttle a certain amount for a programmed amount of time a programmed amount of time after the clutch switch or trans brake switch is activated at the start of  the run.  Many Super Class racers use throttle stops to control their car’s performance to run their index ET.  Couple all the settings available for the throttle stop and weather and wind variations, consistently running the Index ET is complicated.  See Example 4.4. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro’s Throttle Stop Prediction screen will help you decide how to adjust your throttle stop timer for winning consistency.  Click on the Throttle Stop button at the top of the Main Menu and you are presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.56.  This menu will let you predict the throttle stop setting (usually the time the stop is ON or the throttles are closed) required to produce some desired ET (usually the Index) based on 2 previous runs with different throttle stop settings.  Important points for accuracy include: 
• 
It is important for accuracy that most all the other vehicle specs accurately match your vehicle before you use the 'Throttle Stop' option.  This means that if you Calculate Performance for these specs, you will get an ET within about .3 seconds and a MPH within about 2 MPH of what your car runs with No throttle stop. 

• 
These 2 throttle stop settings should be significantly different, ideally 1 producing a faster ET and 1 producing a slower ET than your desired ET. 

• 
The prediction can still work even though both ETs are faster or slower than your desired ET, as long as there is significant difference (at least .3 seconds or more) in the 2 ETs which is not caused simply by the weather change.   

• 
The accuracy of the predicted Throttle Stop also depends on the Time Resolution setting in the Preferences menu available at the Main Menu (.001 seconds gives better accuracy). 

• 
0All 3 runs should use the same weather instruments for all measurements (without calibration or adjustment in between). 

• 
Although you may not want to change your strategy, predictions are best if the throttle stop comes on after the 60 foot timing lights. 


In this menu you can enter: 
• 
Your vehicle's actual 60 ft time and ET for 2 previous runs. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions which produced these results. 

• 
Your vehicle's throttle stop setting for these 2 runs. 

• 
Your desired ET for the third run or Index to Run. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions for the third run where you want to run the Index. 

• 
Optional:  Your prediction of the 60 foot time for the Predicted run. 


When all these have been entered, click on 'Update Throttle Stop' or the Clc button by Throttle Stop.  The program will make 3 passes simulating the 2 runs you have already made and the 3rd run you want to predict.  Based on these results, the program will calculate the throttle stop setting to produce the desired ET for the third run or 'Index to Run'. 
This menu is almost like a separate program, because you can enter comments in the lower left corner to describe what these specs represent.  You can then Save these specs by clicking on File in the Menu Bar, then Save or Save As.  Save As lets you save these specs under a new name, where Save simply updates the current name with any changes. 
By saving sets of specs, you can predict throttle stops in the future when you do not have results from 2 previous runs.  Simply click on File, then Open, and pick a Throttle Stop file with weather conditions or track conditions fairly similar to those you will be running.  Again, be sure the current vehicle specs match your vehicle you are running. 
IMPORTANT:  This method of using a past, saved Throttle Stop file is not nearly as accurate as using previous runs from the same track, same day and same weather instruments. 
See Section 3.3 for how  to Open or Save vehicle files.  Saving or Opening Throttle Stop files work much the same way. 
There are 2 general sets of commands which let you copy sets of data from 1 run to another.  These are: 
• 
The Edit command where you can Copy or Clear various runs. 

• 
The Advance command where you move runs from right to left, as you would when your Predicted run now becomes your Previous Run #2 on which you will predict a new run. Remember, Previous Run #1 and the new Previous Run #2 should have at least .3 seconds difference in ET. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Weather Inputs 
Corr. Barometer, ''Hg Obs. Barometer, ''Hg 
Air Temperature deg F 
Relative Humidity, % Dew Point, deg F 
Elevation, ft Altimeter 
Method of Recording Weather Data 
These are all explained in Section 2.7.1.  All 3 runs must use the same Method of Recording Weather Data.  That is because the same weather instruments should be used for all measurements for the best accuracy. 
Throttle Stop (Previous Runs) 
Is the throttle stop setting (usually the time the throttle stop is on, or is closing the throttles) in seconds.  This is the adjustment you usually have the greatest control over and which gives the best consistency. 
60 foot, sec (Previous Runs) 
Is the 60 foot times for the previous runs. 
ET, sec 
Is the ET you obtained for the 2 previous runs with the different throttle stop settings.  It is best if one of these runs is faster and one is slower than the Index, and the difference in ET is at least .3 seconds. 
Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time 
Click on this combo box for 2 choices: 
• 
Let Program Estimate 60 ft time 

• 
You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below 


If you let the program estimate the 60 ft time, it will assume nearly the same traction as Previous Run #2.  If you want to enter your prediction of 60 ft time, based on lane choice, traction change through the day, etc., select You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below.  Then the 60 foot, sec input will be enabled where you can enter your own estimate. 
60 foot, sec (Predicted Run) 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Is your estimate of the 60 foot time for the Predicted Run.  See Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time above. 
Safety Margin 
Is how much slower you want the program to predict a Throttle Stop time for.  For example, if you set a 9.9 index and a .010 second Safety Margin, the program will predict the Throttle Stop for actually running 9.91 seconds, giving you a .010 second margin for not breaking out (running quicker than the 9.90 index and loosing). 
For example, say the program’s calculations predict a throttle stop setting of .97 seconds.  You must realize that this is based on all inputs being exactly correct, your reaction time being exactly the same as the previous run, and the program’s prediction capabilities being exactly correct.  None of these are exact.  To compensate, you can enter in a safety margin amount of time to compensate for any inconsistencies. 
If your opponent is highly competitive, then enter in a small Safety Margin.  You’ll have to run very close to your Index to win, and are willing to take more of a chance at breaking out. 
If your opponent is not competitive, then enter in a larger Safety Margin.  You won’t have to run that close to your Index to win, but want to make darn sure you don’t break out and beat yourself. 
Index, sec 
Is the Index, or your desired ET.  In the Super Classes these are usually 8.90, 9.90 or 10.90 seconds. 
T/S Start Time 
In this version, this time is only used to ensure the 60 foot times are not being affected by the throttle stop.  If the program thinks the throttle stop is On before the 60 foot time, 60 foot times are not used in the prediction. 
Throttle Stop (Predicted Run) 
This is the program’s prediction of your throttle stop setting to run the Index ET.  If this is blank, click on the Clc button by it or Update Prediction in the menu bar at the top of the menu.  The Throttle Stop is not saved, because its value will change slightly depending on what the other vehicle specs in the program are set to. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.11 Dial In Prediction 
The Dial In Prediction menu will let you predict the ET of a future run based on a past run and the weather conditions of the past run and the future run.  This is very useful for predicting 'Dial In' for bracket racing. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Click on the Dial In button at the top of the Main Menu and you are presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.57.  This menu will let you predict the ET of a future Predicted Run with different weather, wind, and possibly traction conditions based on 1 previous run.  Important points for accuracy include: 
• 
It is important for accuracy that most all the other vehicle specs accurately match your vehicle before you use the 'Dial In' option. This means that if you Calculate Performance for these specs, you will get an ET within about .3 seconds and a MPH within about 2 MPH of what your car actually runs. 

• 
The accuracy of the predicted Dial In also depends on the Time Resolution setting in the Preferences menu available at the Main Menu (.001 seconds gives better accuracy and Dial In prediction to the nearest .001 seconds). 

• 
Both runs should use the same weather instruments for all measurements (without calibration or adjustment in between). 


In this menu you can enter: 
• 
Your vehicle's actual 60 ft time and ET for the Previous run. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions which produced these results for the Previous run. 

• 
The weather and wind conditions for the future Predicted run. 

• 
Optional:  Your prediction of the 60 foot time for the Predicted run. 

• 
A Safety Margin to help prevent breaking out. 


When all these have been entered, click on 'Update Dial In' or the Clc button by Dial In.  The program will make 2 passes simulating the Previous run you have already made and the future run you want to predict.  Based on these results, the program will calculate expected ET or Dial In setting.. 
This menu is almost like a separate program, because you can enter comments in the lower left corner to describe what these specs represent.  You can then Save these specs by clicking on File in the Menu Bar, then Save or Save As.  Save As lets you save these specs under a new name, where Save simply updates the current name with any changes. 
By saving sets of specs, you can predict Dial Ins in the future when you do not have results from a previous run.  Simply click on File, then Open, and pick a Dial In file with weather conditions or track conditions fairly similar to those you will be running.  Again, be sure the current vehicle specs match the vehicle you are running. 
IMPORTANT:  This method of using a past, saved Dial In file is not nearly as accurate as using the previous run from the same track, same day and same weather instruments. 
See Section 3.3 for how  to Open or Save vehicle files.  Saving or Opening a Dial In file works11 much the same way. 
There are 2 general sets of commands which let you copy sets of data from 1 run to another.  These are: 
• 
The Edit command where you can Copy or Clear various runs. 

• 
The Advance command where you move runs from right to left, as you would when your Predicted run now becomes your Previous Run  on which you will predict a new run. 


Weather Inputs 
Corr. Barometer, ''Hg Obs. Barometer, ''Hg 
Air Temperature deg F 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Relative Humidity, % Dew Point, deg F 
Elevation, ft Altimeter 
Method of Recording Weather Data 
These are all explained in Section 2.7.1.  All 3 runs must use the same Method of Recording Weather Data.  That is because the same exact instruments should be used for all measurements for the best accuracy. 
60 foot, sec (Previous Run) 
Is the 60 foot times for the previous run for your car at the track. 
ET, sec 
Is the ET you obtained for the previous run for your car at the track. 
Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time 
Click on this combo box for 2 choices: 
• 
Let Program Estimate 60 ft time 

• 
You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below 


If you let the program estimate the 60 ft time, it will assume nearly the same traction as the Previous Run.  If you want to enter your prediction of 60 ft time, based on lane choice, traction change through the day, etc., select You Enter (predict) 60 Foot Time Below.  Then the 60 foot, sec input will be enabled where you can enter your own estimate. 
60 foot, sec (Predicted Run) 
Is your estimate of the 60 foot time for the Predicted Run.  See Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time above. 
Safety Margin (Predicted Run) 
Is the amount of time you want the program to subtract from its exact prediction of your dial in.  For example, say the program’s calculations predict a 10.055 second dial in.  You must realize that this is based on all inputs being exactly correct, your reaction time being exactly the same as the previous run, and the program’s prediction capabilities being exactly correct. None of these are exact.  To compensate, you can enter in a safety margin amount of time to compensate for any inconsistencies. 
If your opponent is highly competitive, then enter in a small Safety Margin.  You’ll have to run very close to your number to win, and are willing to take more of a chance at breaking out. 
If your opponent is not competitive, then enter in a larger Safety Margin.  You won’t have to run that close to your number to win, but want to make darn sure you don’t break out and beat yourself. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Dial In (Predicted Run) 
This is the program’s prediction of what your Dial In should be.  It is the program’s predicted ET minus the Safety Margin.  Therefore, the Dial In will be quicker (by the amount of the Safety Margin) than what the program actually believes you will run.  If this is blank, click on the Clc button by it or Update Prediction in the menu bar at the top of the menu.  The Dial In is not saved, because its value will change depending on what the other vehicle specs in the program are set to. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.12 Saved Examples 
Many of the specs which the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro uses to predict performance are difficult for some users to get.  For that reason, the program comes with sets of Example specs which the user can load in automatically and easily. 

At the top of most component sections of the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro’s menus, you will find a description of the “Type” of component used.  In Figure 2.35 the component section is the Body Details in the Body & Axle menu.  This combo box can have 2 or 3 choices: 
• 
Use Specs Below 

• 
Pick An Example 

• 
Ex Body: 80s Cutlass-Buick GN, etc (or some other name of a specific example) 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
There are 2 general ways to pick an example component.  You can either select the Pick An Example from the Type combo box or click on the Get Example menu item at the top of the menu.  You may be first presented with a list of general categories of component examples, like shown in Figure 2.59. (This screen would not appear for picking Body Details because there is no other component examples available at this menu.) 
Eventually you will obtain a list of examples, like shown in Figure 2.60.  Here you can select your choice by either clicking on it, then clicking on the Pick button, or double clicking on it. (By single clicking on an example you have saved (not one provided by Performance Trends) you can click on Delete to 



(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Notes:  
•  Not all specs have  
Examples available and  
some Example  
categories have very  
few examples from  
which to choose.  These  
features will expand  
with later updates.  
•  The specs in these  
Examples are  
approximate.  Different  
pieces of hardware and  
later designs may have  
different specs,  

latest information
  Figure 2.63  Saving an Example 
from the manufacturer. 
• No checks are made to see if your combination of Examples is physically possible. You can choose to put Ford 'Toploader' transmission gear ratios behind a 5 HP Briggs & Stratton engine in a Prod 82 Corvette body type.  This may be an interesting "what if", but you must realize this hardware will NOT bolt together. 


Enter most any name up to the number of letters this box allows (different number of letters for different components). 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 


2.12 Special Timer (Team Engineer Version Only) 
The Special Timer lets you time the difference between most any 2 events during a run.  This could be very simple, like the time from 40 MPH to 80 MPH.  Or it could more complex, as shown in Figure 2.64 from the time the car hits 60 MPH to the point it has traveled and additional 200 feet past that point. 
The timer can have applications in many forms of automotive racing and testing, not just drag racing.  Circle track racing, road racing and automotive engineers all have various types of  accelerating performance they want to optimize.  The Special Timer lets them keep track of this special time in the History Log (Figure 2.65), lets them analyze and optimize it with the Chain Calculation (Figure 2.66) or Auto-Optimize features, and display it in the Test Summary section of results. 
Timer 
Is a summary of the timer’s start and stop conditions. 
Use a Special Timer 
Choose Yes to enable the other settings in this screen. 
Start Time At 
Enter the number for starting the timer for the Condition you have entered below. 
Condition 
Choose the type of condition for starting the timer.  For example, in Figure 2.64 it is MPH and the Start Timer At is set to 60, or the timer will start when the vehicle first hits 60 MPH.  Some conditions do not require a Start Timer At, like “Start of the 1-2 Shift”, and Start Timer At is disabled.  

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Stop Timer At 
Enter the number for stopping the timer for the Condition you have entered below. 
Condition 
Choose the type of condition for stopping the timer.  For example, in Figure 2.64 it is Additional Feet and the Stop Timer At is set to 200, or the timer will stop when the vehicle has traveled an additional 200 feet past the point where it hit 60 MPH.  Some conditions do not require a Stop Timer At, like “Start of the 2-3 Shift”, and Stop Timer At is disabled.  

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.13 Chain Calculations 
The Chain Calculation lets you make several calculations in succession (like links of a chain), each time varying 1 or 2 specs through a range of settings.  To get the Chain Calculation screen, enable the Chain Calcs button in the Calculate Performance Conditions screen as shown in Figure 2.67.  Then the Chain Calcs button to bring up the screen shown in Figure 2.68. 
At the Chain Calculations screen, choose the 1 or 2 Categories and specs for those categories doing the Chain Calculation.  The Current value in the program is displayed.  You can then enter a Start At value and Ending value, and a step size value.  For example, in Figure 2.68, the Body & Axle spec of Final Drive Ratio will go through a range of settings of 3.2, 3.4, 3.6, 3.8, 4.0, 4.2, 4.4, 4.6, 4.8, 5.0 and 
5.2.  The program calculates the # Steps The program calculates the # Steps, and the total # combinations (displayed at the top in the square brackets [ ] ) so you get an idea of how many calculations will be made. 
Click on the OK button to start the calculations.  When finished the results will be displayed in a table as shown in Figure 2.69.  From this table you can print the results or graph the results, as shown in Figure 2.70.  You can select to graph any of the outputs of ET, MPH, 60 ft times or the Special Timer results if you have the Team Engineer version. 


(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 




2.14 Auto-Optimize 
The Auto-Optimize feature is much like the Chain Calculation feature described in Section 2.13 with these 3 exceptions: 
• 
You can select to change up to 10 different specs in the different categories. 

• 
You tell the program what you are looking for, or what your performance “target” is. 

• 
The program performs calculations on all combinations and keeps the 10 combinations which most closely match your target. 


To get to the Auto-Optimize screen, enable the Auto-Optimize button in the Calculate Performance Conditions screen as shown in Figure 2.71.  Then the Auto-Optimize button to bring up the screen shown in Figure 2.72. 
At the Auto-Optimize screen, choose the 1 to 10 Categories and specs for those categories doing the Auto-Optimize calculation.  The Current value in the program is displayed.  You can then enter a Start At value and Ending value, and a step size value.  For example, in Figure 2.72, the Body & Axle spec of 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
Final Drive Ratio will go through a range of settings of 3.2, 3.6, 4.0, 4.4,  4.8 and 5.2.  The program calculates the # Steps, and the total # combinations (displayed at the top in the square brackets [ ] ) so you get an idea of how many calculations will be made. 
Click on the OK button to start the calculations.  When finished the results will be displayed in a table as shown in Figure 2.73. From this table you can print the results or graph the results.  You can select to graph any of the outputs of ET, MPH, 60 ft times or the Special Timer results if you have the Team Engineer version. 

Note:  If you want to keep one of the combinations found, you must write down the settings.  Then click on Back to  return to the Main Screen and make these changes.  You may want to first save the current vehicle specs should you want to return to them later.  Once you have made these changes, you may want to save this new “optimized” vehicle to a new name by clicking on File, then Save As at the top left of the Main Screen. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.15 Import Data Logger File (Team Engineer Version Only) 
In the Team Engineer version, you can import a file to graph with the Pro’s simulated runs, to compare simulation with actual data for improved accuracy and understanding.  This option is available under File at the main screen by clicking on Import Data Logger File.  See Figure 2.74.  Actually this file can be any ASCII file with columns of data which recorded at various time intervals.  (This version will not read data in rows.)  If you click on Import Data Logger File, you are presented with a standard Windows Browse or Open screen shown in Figure 2.74.  Find the file you want to import, click on it to highlight it and then click on Open.  The screen of Figure 2.75 is displayed. 

The steps in importing a data file using the features in the Import Specs screen include: 
1. 
Assign the type of Column Separator, either comma separated or double space or tab separated.  The program will assign what it thinks is correct when this screen is first opened, based on how the file looks that you picked. 

2. 
Tell the program if the critical data of time is either a column of data in the data file, or it the data was recorded at even time intervals, for example each row of data is recorded at 0.10 second intervals. 

3. 
If time is not a column of data, then enter what you believe is a good start time (choose 0 if you are not sure) and the time interval, like .1 if data was recorded every tenth of a second. 

4. 
Choose if the data is for a car with a clutch or torque converter. 

5. 
Enter some default Graph Name of up to 16 letters. 

6. 
The non-critical Comments (info only) can be entered if you wish.  These can be printed with graphs and appear in the History Log. 

7. 
Assign the data columns from the file to a Graph Data Name that the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro uses for its graphs.  This is done by clicking on a choice in the File Data Column to highlight it, and then clicking on a Graph Data Name you want 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 2  Definitions 
to assign to that column’s data.  That assignment is then shown in the Data Column Assignments table.  If you have made a mistake, simply go through the process again to re-assign the File Data Column to the correct Graph Data Name.  You do not need to assign all File Data Columns.  For many channels, this makes sense, as you would assign the Engine RPM channel from the data logger file the name of Eng RPM.  However, if you have recorded data logger data like shock travel, or exhaust temp, you can not call it that in the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro.  Either do not import that data by not assigning it to a Graph Data Name, or assign it a Graph Data Name that does not match what the data actually is.  For example, you could assign shock travel data to the “C Effcy  Clutch Efficiency” name.  You would have to remember what this is on the graphs. 
8. Click on OK (import file) when you are satisfied with your choices.  The program will then read the ASCII file you have selected and then make a new file which the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro can read through the History Log.  When you want to graph this data, you do it by setting the “Graph?” column for this new file to Yes in the History Log. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Chapter 3 Output 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer provides several ways to view and output the test results, including: 
• 
Reports of tabular data displayed on the screen 

• 
ASCII files for importing results to other software packages 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output of reports or graphs 

• 
History Log 

• 
Data Libraries for recording test data (and sets of engine specs in the Team Engineer Version) for later use. 


All these topics will be covered in this chapter.  Figure 3.1 shows how to reach all these various features. 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 



3.1 Analysis Reports 
When calculated test results are displayed on the screen, you can obtain an Analysis Report by clicking on Analyze in the menu bar.  The Analysis report consists of 1-3 pages of suggestions for improving performance, safety warnings, etc. concerning the performance results calculated. See Figure 3.3 and 3.4 for examples. 

IMPORTANT:  The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  can NOT anticipate all UNSAFE and poor performing situations.  Do NOT rely only on the Analysis report to point out problems and SAFETY HAZARDS.  You must use your own judgment, expert advice from experienced engine builders and the manufacturer of the components. 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 


  Figure 3.4  Another Portion of Analysis Report  

 


3.2 ASCII Data Files 
You may want to use the results from the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer in other software packages. This could be for additional graph capabilities, statistical analysis, data basing, etc.  Once you have calculated performance (as shown in Figure 3.2), click on File to write the results to an ASCII file with a name of your choosing.  The ASCII File command is possible any time a report is displayed on the screen. 
You can only save the results currently displayed.  If you want to write an ASCII file of a Vehicle file you have previously run, you must open that Vehicle file first, then calculate performance for that Vehicle. 
ASCII File Options 
Include Headings 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Rows vs Columns 
If you do not select this option, data will be written to the file much like it is displayed in the report on the screen.  Select this option to have the report turned on its side, that is, the rows will become columns and the columns will become rows. 
Graph Data (vs Table) 
Check this option to write detailed Graph data (as shown in Table 3.1 in Section 3.3 Graphs), the Data Types which you can graph, which are typically recorded at every .05 seconds of the run, or 20 times a second.  Uncheck this option and the data types and recorded data frequency are the same as displayed in a typical Calculated Performance Report, as shown in Figure 3.1 or 3.2. 
Output All Data 
Select this option to choose (highlight) all Data Types to be written to the ASCII file. 
OK 
Click on OK and the program will ask you for a path and file name for the ASCII file.  Enter a file name for saving this ASCII file. Checks are made to ensure what you enter is a valid file name and that you are not overwriting an 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
3.3 Graphs 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph menu command at the top of the Calculated Performance Results Screen. Figure 
3.7shows a typical graph and a descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
The Graph Menu is shown in Figure 3.8.  You select what Data Types you want to graph from the list at the top.  Click on a Data Type to select, or click on a selected Data Type to “de-select” it. 
Data Types 
The Data Types you can select are listed and defined in Table 3.1 on page 
85.  Only 4 Data Types can be selected for any graph. 
Graph Specs 
Type  
Click on the down arrow button to choose either Pick Individual Channels, or Engine RPM Histograms (only available in the Team Engineer version) .  Engine RPM Histograms are available at various RPM increments.  You can also specify if you want the Histograms in seconds, or % time during the run.  (Histograms are graphs of the amount of time the engine spends at various RPMs.  They can be useful for engine builders as they show the RPMs where the HP should be highest.) 

Time or Distance Graph 
Click on the down arrow button to choose either Time or distance for the horizontal X axis of the graph. 
Make Graph 
Click on Make Graph to make the graph based on these settings. 
Table 3.1  Definitions of Graph Data Types 
MPH  Vehicle speed in MPH.  
Feet  Distance from the start in feet.  
Accel Gs  Acceleration rate in Gs.  
Engine RPM  Engine RPM.  
FrtWhl RPM  Front Wheel RPM.  This is useful for comparison with data logger data.  
Clutch HP  HP lost in clutch or torque converter.  
DShaft RPM  Driveshaft RPM.  This is useful for comparison with data logger data.  
Engine HP  Available engine HP after being limited by % Throttle.  This is different than EngHP in the calculated results screen which is the Engine HP BEFORE being limited by % Throttle.  
Clutch RPM  Input RPM to transmission.  This is useful to compare to Engine RPM to understand clutch or converter slip.  
AeroDyn HP  HP to overcome aerodynamic drag.  
TireRad in  Drive tire radius.  By comparing this number to the number in the Wheel/Tire Specs menu you can determine how much tire squat or growth is taking place.  

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
% Throttle  Percent of available HP from the engine being delivered to the clutch or converter.  This number will be less than 100% during clutch transmission shifts (Shift % Throttle), during launch (Launch % Throttle), due to Throttle Stops, or to limit tire slip for torque converter transmission launches if Computer Launch = Y.  This number is somewhat different than HP% in the calculated results screen, which is a combination of the plot data types % Throttle and % Clutch.  
% Clutch  Percent of clutch force being allowed.  This number will be less than 100% during clutch transmission shifts (0%), during launch (Launch % Clutch), or to limit tire slip for clutch transmission launches if Computer Launch = Y.  This number is somewhat different than HP% in the calculated results screen, which is a combination of the plot data types % Throttle and % Clutch.  
% Trctv Wt  Percent of the vehicle's weight on the drive tires.  This will change with weight transfer, aerodynamic lift or down force, the spec % Wt On Rear Tires, or location of drive tires (RWD/FWD/AWD spec in Vehicle Specs menu).  
% Steer Wt  Percent of the vehicle's weight on the steering tires.  This will change with weight transfer, aerodynamic lift or down force, the spec % Wt On Rear Tires, or location of drive tires (RWD/FWD/AWD spec in Vehicle Specs menu). Note:  When this value gets low, less than 15%, it can be indicating a car which is difficult to control, potentially being unsafe.  
Torq Ratio  Torque multiplication ratio of the torque converter.  
Sped Ratio  Clutch or torque converter speed ratio.  
C Efficncy  Torque converter or clutch efficiency.  This gives an idea of the HP being lost in either of these components.  
CL+Aero HP  The HP lost in the torque converter or clutch PLUS that to overcome aerodynamic drag.  
Tire Slip  Tire Slip in %.  When the tires have “broken loose”, this value will go to 100%  
Ac+CL+A HP  The HP lost in the torque converter or clutch PLUS that to overcome aerodynamic drag PLUS the HP going into accelerating the vehicle down the track.  

Graphs Comparing More Than 1 Test (Team Engineer Version) 
There are 3 basic types of tests which can be graphed in the Team Engineer Version: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results of the test file which you are working with on the Main Screen. 

• 
Tests marked in the History Log.  These are the test results which you previously graphed, started new, opened, etc. which you have marked “Yes” to graph in the History Log  (see Section 3.6). 

• 
Add Test lets you pick any test from the Test Library to add to the top of the History Log, and mark as a test you want to graph.  Since it is at the top of the History Log, it should definitely be included in the next graph. 


In the Team Engineer Version, you can compare data from up to 6 tests, as long as there is room for the Legends (labels) for each graph on the right side of the graph.  Usually this ends up being about 24 graph lines, which could be 6 tests with 4 graph lines (for example, MPH, EngRPM, AccelGs  and CRPM for 6 different runs with different tire sizes). 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 

Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several other features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 


These are discussed in the next sections. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Printing 
Figure 3.10 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  Figure 3.11 shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup.  Figure 3.12 shows how you can add information to a graph printout by clicking on Format, then Edit Printed Comments and Data Output. 

Figure 3.11  Standard Windows Printer Options 
The Properties button (sometimes called “Options” or “Advanced”) button displays a screen for selecting various printing and color options.  Try changing these settings to correct certain print problems. 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 



Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places.   See Figure 3.13 for explaining the use of the cursor. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Changing titles and legend names 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by displaying and printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure 3.14 which will allow you to do this. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph.  The Pro has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures 3.15 and 3.16. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Time Aligning (shifting) Graphs 
Many times you may want to realign 1 graph with respect to another, for example to line up the start of an acceleration, etc. The program allows you to shift (advance or delay) one test over another on the graph, as shown in figure 3.17. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
3.4 Printer Output 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer can print the tabular test results of a report for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer icon.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.18 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the Option boxes.  All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 

Test Results Report Options Include Vehicle Specs  
Select this option if you want all the Vehicle specs from the various menus printed with the report.  This will add 1-2 pages to the printed report. 
Include Test Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the Test File printed with the results. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular report you send to the printer.  These "report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like engine modifications, special test conditions, etc. 
Other Print Options 
Other menus have print menu commands or print buttons as shown in Figure 3.19. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
3.5 Data Libraries 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer allows you to save Vehicle specs (Engine Specs, Test Conds, etc) to the Vehicle File Library under a name of your choosing.  You can then open these Vehicle files out of the Vehicle File Library in the future for comparison or modification.  The Open window is explained below with explanations. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Open a Vehicle File 
To open a Vehicle file saved in the Vehicle Library, click on File at the upper left corner of the Main Screen, then on the Open (from all saved Vehicles). 
You will obtain the window shown on the previous page.  Single click on one of the Vehicles in the list, or click and drag the slide button on the right side of the list to display more Vehicles.  Once you single click on a Vehicle, it is now the Chosen Vehicle File and a preview of the Vehicle is given in the Preview section.  If the file you chose was not a valid Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer file (either Windows V2.0 or the older v1.x for DOS, or standard Drag Racing Analyzer Pro v3.0), the program will tell you and you can not choose it.  Tip:  Once you click on a Vehicle and get a preview, use the up and down arrow keys to go through the list Vehicle-by-Vehicle getting a preview of each Vehicle. 
Once a Vehicle has been chosen, you can delete it by clicking on the Delete button, or Open it by clicking on the Open button in this window.  You can also click on a different Vehicle to Preview it or close this window and return to the Main Screen without choosing a new Vehicle file. 
If you are sure of the Vehicle you want to open, you can simply double click on it from the Vehicle List.  This opens the Vehicle without a preview and closes this menu. 
You can also save sets of Engine specs to its own separate library.  This is done very similarly as with the Vehicle Files, except you click on File, then Open from the individual Engine Specs menu.  See Figure 3.21. 

Save a Vehicle File 
Before we discuss saving a Vehicle file, it is important for you to understand how the program opens and uses Vehicle files. When you open a Vehicle from the Vehicle Library, you are only using a copy of the Vehicle.  The original Vehicle file is kept in the library.   
As you make changes to the Vehicle, they are only made to this copy.  The original file is not changed.  If you want to delete your changes, you can simply open a fresh, unchanged copy of the original Vehicle file from the Library.  If you want to keep 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
your changes, you must save them. This can be done by clicking on File, then Save.  You are also asked if you want to save your changes whenever you open a new Vehicle, and the program has detected that you have made changes to the current file. 

To save a Vehicle File, you will be presented with the Save Window as shown above.  The program suggests a new Vehicle name which is the same as the current Vehicle name shown at the top of the Main Screen.  If you want to save your changes to the same name, simply click on OK. This will update the current Vehicle file with your latest vehicle changes. 
If you want to save the current set of Vehicle specs with your changes to a new name (and leave the current Vehicle file in the Library unchanged), then click on the suggested file name and modify it as you want.  For example, in the window shown above, you may want to add 2 to the current name CAMVEHICLE to create CAMVEHICLE2 to indicate this is the 2nd revision of CAMVEHICLE.  This is the safest way to make changes, because you can always return to an earlier version and see what you had done. 
Certain other types of file names are not acceptable, for example those that include certain characters like / \ [ ] : | < > + =. The program will warn you if this problem is encountered. 
Vehicle files are saved to folders you have created in the DRPFILES folder in the DRP20 folder under PERFTRNS.PTI folder.  You can copy Windows Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer files from programs on other computers to this folder and they will be found by the program.  The Windows Version 2.0 will read files produced with the older DOS Pro v1.1 and vehicle files from the standard Drag Racing Analyzer v2.2 (DOS) and v3.0 (Windows).  Just copy them into a folder under the 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
DRPFILES folder (other than the Examples folder).  The Save to Floppy and Open From Floppy commands discussed below are an alternate, perhaps easier way to copy files from one computer to another. 
The method of saving an Engine file is exactly the same as complete Vehicle Files, except that you access the Save menu by clicking on File at the top of these individual menus, as shown in Figure 3.21. These files are saved to the ENGINE folder. 
Advance Open or Save Screen 
If you click on the Advanced button in either the Open or Save As screen, you will obtain the screen shown in Figure 3.23. From here you can access most any file on the computer on most any disk drive. 
Copy to Floppy Open From Floppy 
Figure 2.24 shows how to copy files to and from floppy disks. 
Tips to Advanced Users: 
If you have a file from another computer, from another disk (like a floppy) or folder, you can simply copy it into any folder in the DRPFILES folder and it will be found by the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro program. This can be done with a program like Windows Explorer, which is part of Windows Programs or Accessories or Tools.  You can also create new folders in the DRPFILES folder and these will also be used by the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro program. 

Figure 3.24  File Commands for Floppy Disks 

These 2 commands let you easily copy the current vehicle from one computer to another. You can change the default floppy drive from A to B in the Preferences. See Section 2.1. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
3.6 History Log 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro remembers the results and the vehicle specs which produced those results for up to the last 25 to 100 runs you have made.  The number of runs saved is selectable in the Preferences menu, Section 2.1.  This can be a very handy comparison of one run to another and saves you the trouble of making notes on pieces of paper.  It is also handy to be able to go back to some condition which gave very good performance, but you don’t remember why or what the specs were. 
Figure 3.25 shows the History Log  and  options.  Example 4.1 discusses the History Options in detail. 

Test Title 
Click on Test Title and you are asked if you want to retrieve the specs which produced these results.  The program will first ask if you want these specs retrieve, answer Yes and the specs are retrieved. 
Save 
Choose to Save certain Test Results by clicking on the Save column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Save move to the bottom of the History Log as more runs are made, but will not fall off the History Log. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Feet 
Is the distance of the race.  The “Imprvmnts” (amount of improvement in performance between successive runs) in the History is only shown if the runs were for the same distance. 
Dnsy Alt 
Density Altitude in feet above sea level of the current track weather conditions. Many racers like this number for comparisons. It basically means for a standard 29.92" barometer, 60 deg, 0% humidity day what altitude would give the same barometric pressure as the current track conditions. 
Dry Dnsy Alt 
Dry Density Altitude in feet above sea level of the current track weather conditions, sometimes called Corrected Density Altitude (corrected for humidity). It basically means for a standard 29.92" barometer, 60 deg, 0% humidity day what altitude would give the same oxygen content as the current track conditions.  This is a better measure than Density Altitude for your car’s true HP potential. 
60 ft Imprvmnt ET Imprvmnt MPH Imprvmnt 
Are the test results for the particular run.  The Imprvmnts are the improvement of a particular run over the previous run. Imprvmnt is left blank if the previous run was not for the same Feet distance as that particular run in the History log. 
If the Feet distances are 5280 ( 1 mile) or 7040 ft (the distance of El Mirage), the 60 foot time is actually  the 660 foot (1/8 mile) time . If the Feet distance is are 26400 (the distance of Bonneville), the 60 foot time is actually the 2 mile time . 
Timer Imprvmnt Timer Condition 
These columns appear if you have the Team Engineer version, and are a record of the time interval for the Special Timer feature.  Timer Condition is a reminder of what specs you set for the Special Timer.  See Section 2.9. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
Print 
You can print the History Log on a printer by clicking on the 'Print' menu command.  Note that the History Log will be most readable when the Page Orientation is in Landscape setting. 
Options 
Click on Options and you can select to show or hide the Improvements columns.  Hiding these columns condenses the History Log so all results can be viewed more easily, without having to scroll left/right. 
History Log at Graph Screen 

At the Graph Screen, several options are available to graph selected tests from the History Log, and change the Graph Titles. You can obtain the History Log by clicking on the menu command History Log at the top of the Graph Screen.  The History Log is how you graph different tests together for comparison.  From this screen you can: 
• Choose to Graph certain Test Results by clicking on the Graph column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Graph will be graphed when you click on the 'Graph Tests Marked 'Yes' '.  The first test (usually the current Test you are working with) is always graphed even with no Yes marked.  The number of tests actually graphed are limited by available space, usually a limit of about 24 graph lines total.  
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 
• 
Graph only the current test results (the test file at the top of the Log) by clicking on 'Graph Current Test Only'.   

• 
Click on 'Graph Title' to change the Standard Title for this test.  The program defaults to the Vehicle Name, but you can change this to most any name of 16 characters or less..  You can also specify 'Alternate' titles and legend names by clicking on 'Format' at the top of the Graph Screen, then 'Edit Titles/Legends'. 

• 
Choose to Save certain results you believe are special and you may want to recall or graph in the future.  See the Save explanation of the previous page. 


(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 3  Output 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Chapter 4 Examples 
Each example in this chapter becomes progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated. 
   The results shown in these examples may be     somewhat different than what you obtain with   your particular version of the program That   is due to minor upgrades in the calculations   in later versions. 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 


Example 4.1  Finding the Best Axle Ratio 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Read the Preliminary "Example To Get You Going" (Section 1.5) 

• 
Moving around in the menus and changing specs (Section 2.0, 2.2-2.6) 

• 
Calculate Performance and evaluating results (Section 2.7) 

• 
History Log (Section 3.6) 

• 
Obtaining a printed hardcopy of the results (Section 3.4) 


Example 4.1 will be fairly simple to get you started.  We will simulate a popular modification, installing a different rear axle ratio.  We will see the effect on 60 ft times, ET and MPH. 
First, start the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro program following the procedure in Section 1.4 by either: 
• 
Clicking on the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro v2.0 icon on your Desktop 

• 
Clicking on Start, Programs, Perf. Trends, then Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  v2.0 

• 
Clicking on the DRP.EXE (DRP) program file under the DRP20 folder under the PERFTRNS.PTI folder using Windows Explorer. 



You will be shown the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro’s Main Menu.  Notice at the top of the screen that the current Vehicle file is a 96 Mustang GT. 
If it is not 96 Mustang GT or if you think the current 96 Mustang GT’s specs have been changed, you can Open up this Vehicle file by clicking on the Open button as shown in Figure 4.2.  Open the Vehicle file 96 Mustang GT shown in Figure 4.2. If  you have made any changes to the vehicle which originally appeared at the top of the Main Menu, the program will first ask you if you want to save these changes.  Answer No and you will be returned to the Main Menu with the 96 Mustang GT specs loaded into the program. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 

ratio on this vehicle, we first need to get a "baseline" test.  A "baseline" is a performance test before the modification. Therefore, if you examine the contents of any component menus, leave all current values as they are. 

Click on the Calculate Performance button and you will now be shown the Calculation Conditions screen.  This screen gives the conditions for calculating performance like track weather and wind, the length of the run and the rollout distance.  For now, leave these values as they are. 
Proceed with the calculations by clicking on the Calculate Performance (ET) menu item at the top of this menu. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 

Note the ET of 14.763 seconds with a MPH of 95.95 at the top of the report with the stock 3.08 axle.  However, in the columns of numbers you see Feet = 1320, Time = 14.763 sec, but MPH = 96.69, not 95.95.  This is because a drag strip has timing lights spaced 66 feet apart at the end of the quarter mile.  These lights are used to determine the vehicle's speed at the end of the run.  Even though the 96 Mustang GT was doing 96.69 MPH at 1320 FEET, it only averaged 95.95 MPH over the last 66 ft of the 1320 FEET.  See Section 2.7.2, Calculate Performance Output. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Other important things to look for in the Test Results screen include: 
• 
Notice that the Notes Summary is pointing out a couple of things:  Clutch Slip High and Low Tire Traction. If you click on the Notes button, you obtain the screen shown in Figure 4.4.  These notes can be useful for understanding your performance, however, for now you are going to stick with the street tires, which are probably limiting performance. 

• 
To obtain a graph of these results, click on the Graph button or Graph menu item. The program will present a menu like Figure 4.5. Since the Notes pointed out high clutch slip, you might want to try to graph Clutch and Engine RPM  as the Data Types as shown. Then click on Make Graph to produce a graph similar to that shown in Figure 4.6. 

• 
Much of the reason there is so much clutch slip in first gear is the Launch Type in the Driving Specs menu is set to Computer Driven Launch.  The computer is going full throttle on the engine and “feathering” the clutch to prevent these street tires from breaking loose.  This provides for nearly the best launch with these tires, but produces a lot of clutch slip (and clutch wear in the real car). 


Changing the Rear Axle Ratio 
Now for the good part; lets change the gear ratio and see what happens.  Get back to the Main Menu by clicking on Back in the menu bar (or pressing <ESC>) at the graph screen (Figure 4.5), then clicking on Back (or pressing <ESC>) again at the tabular Test Results screen (Figure 4.3). 
Figure 4.7  Body & Axle Menu for Changing Rear Axle Ratio 
Click on Body & 
Axle to bring up the menu shown in Figure 4.7.  Because 

Click on Final Drive 
you can make many 
Ratio (rear 
modifications on the 
axle ratio 
computer easily, it is 
for rear 
not necessary to 
wheel drive 
install only 1 
cars) and 
different axle ratio.  
change it to 
In fact, you learn 
2.0.  Then 
more by installing 
recalculate 
several ratios with 
perfor­
only small changes 
mance. 
so you can clearly see trends. 
Repeat this sequence 
Lets arbitrarily 
trying 
choose axle ratios 
several 
starting at a point we 
different 
believe will 
axle ratios. 
definitely hurt performance, and increment through what we believe will be the best ratio.  For example, we could start at 2.0 and increment in .50 ratio increments to 5.5.  With wrenches, money, parts and a drag strip, this could take several days.  On the computer we will be done in a few minutes, with clean fingernails and money left in our wallet! 
Click on Final Drive Ratio under Axle Specs and type 2 over the current value of 3.08.  (If 2 had not been within acceptable limits, the program will display the limits.)  Then click on OK (back) to return to the Main Menu.  There you can click on 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 

Calculate Performance, then the Calculate Performance button at this menu (as you did before) or just click on the Calc ET button at the  top of the Main Menu.  The Calc ET button  is a shortcut. 
Figure 4.8 shows an ET of 
14.908 at 95.72 MPH, with an "improvement" of -.145 seconds (actually a .145 second slower ET).  MPH was also slower by .22 MPH.  This shows an increase in ET (slower), as we expected.  The negative (-) improvements mean that performance was hurt by the last modification. 
An alternate way to see this comparison and improvement is to display the Test History Log. Click on History as shown in Figure 4.8 and select Always Show History. The History Log is a convenient way to keep track of your results to watch 
Figure 4.9  Comparison Graph Using History Log 


Click on History Log to display History Log 
Click in Graph? column to put a yes there to include the results with the 3.08 axle ratio in the graph. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
trends.  We will use it here to find the best axle ratio. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Graph these results with the Baseline 3.08 axle results for the graph in Figure 4.10.  Figure 4.10 points out a couple of things: 
• 
Engine RPM drops to 2000 RPM during the launch, possibly “bogging” the engine.  That’s because  with less torque multiplication in the rear axle, the computer releases the clutch much faster because traction is not a problem.  This pulls down engine RPM during the launch. 

• 
The clutch locks up (stops slipping) much faster, again because of less traction problems, the clutch is released faster. 

• 
The run is made in only 2 gears . 


Click on Back to return to the Calculated Results screen, and click on History Log if it is not showing.  At the History Log, click on Clear History.  You will see all the History rows blanked out except the current 2.0 axle ratio results.  Another useful feature of the History Log is the ability to change the Test Title in the first column to anything you want.  Click on the Test Title for the 2.0 axle ratio run.  You will be shown a test input box like that of Figure 4.11.  Now when you graph the results for the 2.0 Axle Ratio, the graph legend will show “2.0 Axle Ratio”. 
Now go through the sequence of: 
• 
Increasing the Final Drive Ratio by .5 in the Body & Axle screen. 

• 
Calculating results 

• 
Changing the Test Title in the History Log to the axle ratio just tested. 


Once you have increased the axle ratio to 5.0, you will get a History Log that looks like Figure 4.12.  Possibly to your surprise, the 2.5 and 3.0 ratio (close to the stock  3.08) is near optimum.  You may then think "Why do drag cars have such low (high numerical) axle ratios?"  Lets run these axle ratios again, with the 96 Mustang GT set up for drag racing.  Lets install slicks and drive more aggressively by changing the things identified in Table 4.1. 

Table 4.1:  Modifications To Set Up 96 Mustang GT for "Serious" Drag Racing 
Action on actual car  Modification in the program to simulate this action  
Install 8” Slicks  Construction changed to Drag Slicks and Tread Width changed to 8 in the Wheel/Tires menu. (For now, lets assume the slicks are no "taller" or heavier than the original street tires, leave the Wheels/Tires Wt, lbs at 40 and Tire Diameter at 24.9.)  
Aggressive Launch  Launch RPM changed to 5000 in the Driving Specs menu.  
Power Shifts  Shift Time reduced to “.2  Fast” and Shift % Throttle increased to “100  Power Shifts” in the Driving Specs menu.  

This time, rather than making changes to the Final Drive Ratio, one at a time, lets take advantage of the Pro’s Chain Calculation feature.  After making the changes described in Table 4.1, click on the big Calculate Performance button.  In the Calculate Performance conditions, click on the Chain Calculation option button, which enables the Chain button which you can then click on.  This brings up the Chain Calculation screen.  See Figures 4.13 and 4.14. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Figure 4.13  Doing Chain Calculations 

Click here to open the Calculate Performance Conditions screen shown h 
Click here to enabled Chain Calcs, then click on Chain Calcs button to display screen of Figure 4.14. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Figure 4.15 Chain Calculation Results 


Click on Graph button for ChainGraph screen shown here. Select ET and click on Make Graph for graph below. 


Table shows the exact best was at 3.5 Axle Ratio, with 4.5 running only .001 seconds slower. 
Graph shows almost no difference in ET for ratios from 3.5 to 4.5. 
You can click on the Graph Button to produce a graph of the ETs for these different Axle Ratios.  The graph shows the results more clearly, that there is almost no difference between the ETs for 3.5 to 4.5, when compared to the other results. 
Another thing which should be very obvious is it was much easier to have the program do all the changes and keep track and label all the results.  When you become more experienced, the Chain Calculation will be a great time saver. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro allows you to easily maneuver between screens and menus with the click on a mouse. 

• 
The program has several useful features like .001 Sec Increments (time) for improved accuracy, the Performance Summary and History Log to track you changes, and the Notes and Graphs to understand and analyze your performance. 

• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro allows you to simulate "real world" modifications by simply typing in new specifications which simulate the hardware modification. 

• 
Like most other vehicle settings, there is no single "best" axle ratio for the 96 Mustang GT.  The "best" ratio will change depending on other vehicle specs, for example like Tire specs which affect traction. 

• 
The Chain Calculation feature can be a great time saver for doing several calculations at once. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Example 4.2  Calibrating the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro for Your Car 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Changing Calculate Performance Conditions (Section 2.7) 

• 
Using Calculation Menus (Section 2.8) 

• 
Adjusting specifications to match actual vehicle performance (Appendix 3) 

• 
Using the Match Vehicle Performance Option (Section 2.9) 


When using the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro to predict the effect of modifications on a certain vehicle, it is best to first "calibrate" the program to match the vehicle's actual results.  "Calibrate" means to fine tune an instrument (the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro in this case) to improve its accuracy.  Once the program is calibrated, its predictions are more likely to match your vehicle's response to modifications. 
Like Example 4.1 and all examples in this manual, the Time Step for Calculations is set to the more accurate .001 seconds.  To do this (or check that it was done), click on Preferences in the Main Menu and select .001 Sec Increments. If you change it, you will notice the program warning you that the results may change slightly, because you are now asking for higher resolution time calculations.   
We will calibrate the program for a 1971 Monte Carlo, with a 502 cubic inch big block and 400 Turbo Hydra-Matic.  The car runs 10.12 ETs at 133.1 MPH.  Lets assume there are no vehicles in the Vehicle Library exactly like this, so we will have to build our own. 
The 69 428 Cobra Jet Mustang is approximately the right size and is an automatic, but it is a production car.  The Super Stock Firebird V6 is a 2 speed automatic with a V-6 engine, but is already set up for drag racing.  We choose to start with the Super Stock Firebird V6 file.  Once you are finished following Example 4.2, you should have a set of specifications which should match the file EXAMPLE 4.2 in the Vehicle Library.  (If we had chosen the 69 428 Cobra Jet Mustang, calibrating would follow the same basic procedure, and the results would have been equally as accurate.  You just have to change more specs.) 
First, you must have results from a "good" run where you know the track conditions, like Table 4.2. 
Next, open a fresh copy of the Super Stock Firebird V6 from the Vehicle Library by clicking on the Open button at the top left of the Main Menu as shown in Example 4.1.  Enter the Monte Carlo's specs into the program as follows: 
Table 4.2:  1971 Monte Carlo Running 10.12 @ 133.1 MPH 

Critical Specs  Measured/Known Value  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Input  
Weight w driver  3200  Vehicle Weight, lbs in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Rear axle wt w driver  1400  % Wt on Rear Tires in Body & Axle Specs menu   
Wheelbase  105  Wheelbase in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Aerodynamic Cd  ?  Drag Coefficient in Body & Axle Specs menu  
 Rear Axle Ratio  4.56  Final Drive Ratio in Body & Axle Specs menu  
Engine displacement  502 cid  Displacement, CID in Engine specs menu  
Converter  yes  Clutch/Tq Converter Type:  Pick Example Converter  
Transmission  Turbo Hydra-Matic 400  Transmission Type: Pick Example Transmission  

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
1st shift RPM  7400  1-2 Shift RPM in Driving Specs menu  
2nd shift RPM  7400  2-3 Shift RPM in Driving Specs menu  
Rear Tires, 32 x 14 slicks  Drag Slicks  Rear Tire Construction Type:  Drag Slicks in Wheels/Tires menu  
Rear Tires, 32 x 14 slicks  32  Rear Tire Diameter in Wheels/Tires menu  
Rear Tires, 32 x 14 slicks  14  Rear Tire Tread Width in Wheels/Tires menu  
Rear Tires, traction  ?  Rear Tire Traction Factor in Wheels/Tires menu  
Track Conditions:  
Weather Instruments  Radio Weather Report  Method of Recording Weather Data:  Radio/TV Weather Report with Dew Point  
ET, 1/4 mile  10.12  
60 ft  1.48  
MPH, 1/4 mile  133.1  
Observed RPM, 1/4 mile  7200  
Observed Stall RPM  4500  
Barometric Pressure  29.46 **  Baro Pressure, “Hg in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Air Temp (dry bulb)  83  Air Temperature in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Wet Bulb Temp  73  Dew Point, deg F in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Track Elevation  860  Elevation, ft in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Wind Speed  5  Head Wind MPH in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  
Headwind  5  Head Wind Direction:  Headwind in Calculate Performance Conditions menu  

  ** From your own weather station instrument, measuring actual (not corrected) barometric pressure.        
Engine specs 
Click on Engine specs at the Main Menu to display the current power specs for the Super Stock V-6.  Change Displacement to 502.  Then select the Method of Describing Power Curve which makes the most sense: 
• 
If you had a complete dyno curve, you could pick Specified Full Curve and enter the dyno curve in the right hand section of this screen. 

• 
You could pick an Example Power Curve and try to find something that you think would be close to your big block Chevy. 

• 
If you know very little about the engine or power curves in general, it is probably best to pick Specified HP Only.  This option lets the program decide the shape of the power curve. This is the one you pick. 


Now, to estimate the amount of HP coming from this engine, click on the Clc button by the Peak HP spec.  You will see the Calculation Menu of Figure 4.16. Most all the input specs are disabled (dimmed to gray and they do not respond to inputs) except Type of Calc.  Click on this combo box and select Quarter Mile MPH, because you know this but you do not know Eighth Mile MPH or you would have to estimate Vol Eff.  Now several specs are enabled.  They are 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
loaded with values taken from the Super Stock Firebird V6. 
For inputs to this menu, change Vehicle Weight from 2300 for the Super Stock Firebird V6 to the Monte’s 3200 lbs. Enter 133.1 for Quarter Mile MPH. Assume your RPM at HP Peak occurs a few hundred RPM before your shift points, for example 6900 RPM. Change the V-6’s 7800 RPM to your estimate of 6900 for your Big Block Chevy. 
The values in your calculation screen should now look like those in Figure 4.16. Note that the program is assuming a torque converter is being used, as is the case 

Calculate Performance Conditions 
Although it seems a little out of order to enter the Calculate Performance conditions now, the weather conditions in this menu are used for some torque converter calculations, so we will enter the Weather conditions now. Click on the Calculate Performance button.  Before entering weather conditions, select the appropriate Method of Reading Weather Data. 
You use your own barometer instrument which reads actual (not corrected) barometer and have a wet and dry bulb psychrometer for humidity.  Click on the Method of Reading Weather Data and select Uncorr Baro and Rel Hum.  There is no Wet and Dry Bulb Humidity option. Uncorr Baro and Dew Point would have been equally valid.  You will have to calculate Rel Humidity from Wet and Dry bulb measurements by clicking on the Rel. Humidity’s Clc button.  Notice that Elevation becomes disabled since you 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 


are not used in the calculations. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
You will notice the Converter Capacity was 385 for the V-6 and shows a 7480 RPM for the current Stall RPM. This makes sense since this is was a loose converter for a higher RPM, lower torque producing engine.  Now the converter has now been coupled with a high torque big block. Stall speed would be very high.  You could pick an example converter or simply enter your known stall RPM of 4500 and press enter.  The program respond with calculating a Converter Capacity of 
202.5.  For Torque Multiplication, we change the left over 1.7 from the V-6 to a more 

typical 2.0. (Notice how this Stall RPM is based on the current Power Curve and Track Weather Conditions, which is why we entered Weather Specs before going to the Transmission Specs.) 
Click on the Transmission Type combo box and select Pick Example Transmission.  From the list of transmissions, select the Auto-Turbo Hydra-Matic 400.  Either double click on it to select it in one stroke, or click on it to highlight it, then click on the Pick button.  You  will next be presented with a screen comparing the Super Stock Firebird V6’s Powerglide transmission specs to the TH400’s.  Click on this screen’s Load these Example Specs button.  Then you will see a general description of the example transmission specs, and then you  will be returned to the Transmission Specs menu with the TH400’s specs loaded in. The Transmission Specs menu will now look like Figure 4.21. 
Body & Axle 
Click on Body & Axle at the Main Menu to open this menu.  You’ll see 3200 lbs already entered, from when we used 3200 lbs to calculate the HP based on quarter mile MPH.  For Axle specs enter the Monte’s 4.56, and leave the Diff Lock Eff at 100% 
Spool.  You are not sure of a choice for Axle Design, so leave it as it was for the Firebird.  You run a 6 degree pinion angle and 2 degree transmission yoke angle, which averages out to 4 degrees (6 
+2 = 8, divided by 2 = 4).  However, you believe that during the run, this straightens out to about 4 degrees on pinion and 2 degrees on the transmission, or an average of 3 degrees during the run, so choose 3 degrees for U Joint Angles. 
For Body Details, click on Type and select Pick Example Body Details.  There are no Monte Carlos in the list, so select the closest match of Typical 60s/70s Intermediate.  This will load several specs, but you will fine tune some to match your known 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
measurements. First, click on the Clc button for % Wt on Rear to open its Calculation Menu.  Enter the known weight of 1400 lbs for Weight on 1 Axle and select Rear for Which Axle.  It calculates 43.8% as the Calculated % Wt on Rear Tires.  Click on Use Calc Value to load it into the Body Details.   
Also, type in your measured Wheelbase of 105 instead of the example’s spec of 108, and measured Rear Track Width of 50 versus the examples 60.  (The Monte’s rear axle is narrowed to accommodate the 

Wheels & Tires 
For Front Wheel/Tire specs, you weigh a wheel and tire and come up with 20 lbs.  The diameter you measure at about 22”.  You keep the Front Wheel/Tire Type of “Use Specs Below”, and enter these measurements.  (Actually, Front Wheel/Tire(s) specs are not that critical unless you are estimating a performance improvement by modifying Front Wheel/Tire weight or diameter.  If the measurements were not available, you could have simply selected “Let Program Estimate” for the Type.) 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
For Rear Wheel/Tire Specs, select Pick Example Wheel/Tires from the list of Types.  Select the Example Goodyear Superstock 32 x 14 Drag Slicks.  The Wheel & Tire specs menu should now look like Figure 4.24. 
Driving Specs 
At the Driving Specs menu, you see most of the specs are disabled indicating these values will not be used in the calculations.  Leave the Launch Specs Type set to Computer Driven-No Tire Spin.  This is the easiest way to get nearly optimum launches without having to constantly adjust the launch specs.  (If you had a “2 step” type ignition system, or some system which held engine RPM less than full power “flash” or stall RPM, you could have chosen the “Comp Drvn-No tire spin (set Start RPM)”  Launch Type and then entered the appropriate Starting Launch RPM,) 
Also leave Shift Time at .4 Shift Kit as the Super Stock Firebird V6 was using.  Set the 1-2 Shift RPM and 2-3 Shift RPM to your shift RPMs of 7400 for both.  Driving Specs should now look like Figure 4.25. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
At last, we’ve adjusted all specs as close as we reasonably can.  Now return to the Main Menu and click on Calc ET at the top of the screen.  You obtain  an ET of 10.324, a MPH of 129.90 and a 60 ft of 1.493, all 3 which are close, but slightly slower than what you actually ran.  See Figure 4.26. 
Match Vehicle Performance Feature 
The program is currently predicting your car runs slower than your actual car runs.  We should fine tune these specs to get a better match between real time slips and what the program predicts.  In some programs, this would mean doing a lot of “cut and try”.  Adjust a spec, see if you got a better match on, say 60 foot time.  Now if you did get a better match on 60 ft time, did you “screw up” your MPH, ET, etc. 
The solution is the Match Vehicle Performance option, available at the Main Menu.  Return to the Main Menu from the Test Results screen of Figure 4.26. Click on the Match Veh Perf button at the top, to display the menu similar to Figure 4.27.  Enter in your actual performance, including the engine RPM as you go through the traps (at the end of the quarter mile) of 7500 RPM.  It should look like Figure 4.27.  Then click on the OK (adjust veh. specs to match performance) button. 
The program makes several passes adjusting critical specs between each pass, fine tuning the specs to find a combination which best matches your actual vehicle’s performance.  After 20-30 passes, it arrives at the combination shown in Figure 4.28.  At the top of this menu you see how close these new specs will 

make the performance match.  In the lower section, you see the Old specs, and the new ones arrived at, which you can either Keep, or discard and return to the old specs.  You see that the only New spec which is much different than the old specs in Engine Pk HP, which has increased from 620 to 704 HP. 
Click on the Keep These New Specs button to keep these new specs. 
Note:  The combination of specs arrived at by the Match Vehicle Performance feature are not necessarily the most accurate combination of specs to match your car. 

The menu of Figures 4.27 and 4.28 are now gone.  At the Main Menu, calculate performance and you confirm these specs do give results as stated by the Match Vehicle Performance screens, and that do match your car, just as shown in Figure 4.28.  The ET of 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 

New Name.  Next the screen shown in Figure 4.29 is displayed.  Change the New Vehicle Name from Super Stock Firebird V6 to something that matches these specs, like 71 Monte Carlo as shown.  You could select to save the 71 Monte Carlo to a different folder, or create a new folder by selecting Add Folder for the Folder Name. 
Now you are ready to check various modifications on your actual vehicle, like changing gear ratios, tire size, or shift points, etc.  See Example 4.3. 
Conclusions: 
• 
After accurately entering specs, and then fine tuning them with the Match Vehicle Performance feature, the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro's results can closely match the results of most any specific vehicle. 

• 
The program has several options for entering specs, like picking example specs from preloaded lists, or by calculating them using Calculation menus from other known information or measurements 

• 
You can make most any file from the Vehicle Library match your vehicle's specs following this procedure.  Then you can save all these specs under a new name in the library for use at any time in the future. 


(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 


Example 4.3  Predict Bracket Racing "Dial In" 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Predicting detailed performance changes based on weather changes (Section 2.7) 

• 
Dial In Prediction Menu (Section 2.11) 


One place computers are widely used is in Bracket Racing, where the racer must accurately predict their ET before the race. This predicted ET is called the "dial in" and is used for setting starting handicaps.  Example 4.3 will demonstrate how to use the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro for determining your "dial in". 
Matching Your Vehicle’s Performance 
The first step is to get the computer results to match your actual drag strip results.  For Example 4.3, we will use the 1971 Monte Carlo file which was developed in Example 4.2.  This file is in the Vehicle Library under the name Example 4.2, so click on the Open button (or Click on File and then Open) and open this file. 
For your own vehicle, follow the procedure in Example 4.2 to match the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro to your vehicle specs for some "good running" day.  When the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro's predicted results match your vehicle's results, save these specs to the Vehicle Library.  Use a new vehicle name like "133.1MPH 10.12ET" which could be for the your vehicle running 
133.1 MPH in 10.12 seconds. 
Note:  .001 Sec Increments 
Since we will be looking for very minor ET changes, we should select the .001 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu.  This will have the program calculate all time results to the nearest thousandth of a second.  This was done in Example 4.2. Calculate performance for the file Example 4.2 file and you obtain 10.182 @ 133.43 MPH. 
Open Up Dial In Menu 

Menu. These vehicle specs do not have to produce your ET and MPH exactly, but should be within a couple of MPH and a couple of tenths of the ET. 
You are first given a notice to this effect as shown in Figure 4.30.  Click on Yes and you will see a screen similar to that shown in Figure 4.31. 
First, since you are starting a new sequence of runs at a new race, click on File and then New.  This will blank out all the entries. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Next, obtain current weather conditions for the drag strip.  For this example, we are using a commercial "Weather Station" package: 
• 
A barometer instrument which reads our actual observed barometric pressure from 28" to 32" Hg. 

• 
A dial thermometer for air temperature. 

• 
A dial hygrometer which reads out in % Relative Humidity. 

• 
Wind speed and direction you obtain from a hand held "wind speed meter and compass". 


The Method of Reading Weather Data of “Uncorr. Baro and Rel. Hum.” exactly matches your instrument package, so select it. 
Load In a Practice Run 
You make your first practice run, recording 10.150 at 134.2 with a 1.521 60 foot time.  The weather for this run was: 
• 
28.56 " Hg • 74 degrees 

• 
72 % relative humidity 

• 
14 MPH tail wind (helping push the car down the track) 


Enter this data into the Dial In menu for the Previous Run as shown in Figure 4.32.  You are now ready to start predicting future runs. 
Predict Dial In 
For your first round, you measure the weather as: 
• 
28.79 " Hg • 81 degrees 

• 
66 % relative humidity 

• 
7 MPH tail wind (helping push the car down the track) 


The weather specs for both the Practice (Previous) run and the Predicted run are shown in Figure 4.32. 
A very useful input is the Safety Margin, which is an amount of time the program subtracts from the predicted ET to help prevent you from "breaking out" should the car run slightly quicker than the predicted ET.  You will have to use your judgment based on your competition for the Safety Margin you need.  If you have good competition, you will have to risk breaking out and use a small Safety Margin, for example .005 seconds.  If you competition is poor, use a larger Safety Margin, for example .030 seconds. 
The program predicts a 10.186 ET or “Dial In” based on your first run and the change in weather, which includes the Safety Margin of .005 seconds. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples (C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 


However, let say you believe that you will run a .030 second quicker 60 foot time than on the Previous run.  This may be due to one lane being stickier than another, or other changes in the track conditions.  Under this condition, a better choice for Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time may be “You enter (predict) 60 ft time below”.  Then the spec 60 Foot Time for the Predicted run 
round into the Predicted Run column.   
You also realize that your opponent was very lucky to get to the 2nd round, as his opponent red lighted.  He ran a .63 reaction time, and you have confidence you can easily beat him if you don’t break out.  Therefore, you put in a higher Safety margin of .030 seconds to help insure you don’t break out. 
When finished, click on the Clc button by Dial In or the Update Prediction command.  The new predicted Dial In is 10.241 as shown in Figure 4.32.  This is how you will proceed, advancing the Predicted Run‘s weather and actual ET and 60 foot time to the Previous Run, and coming up with new Dial Ins through the rounds. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro can make detailed ET predictions based on changes to weather conditions. 

• 
The Dial In menu makes calculating Dial Ins for Bracket Racing convenient. 

• 
The Safety Margin spec allows you to fine tune the predicted Dial In depending on your competition 

• 
Using .001 Sec Increments (instead of .01 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu) lets the program make ET and Dial In predictions in thousandths of a second. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Example 4.4  Predict Throttle Stop to Run Index 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): • Example 4.2 and 4.3 
• 
Throttle Stop, Section 2.10 

• 
Track Weather Specs, Section 2.7.2 


This example is very similar to Example 4.3 except, instead of predicting your ET, you must change your throttle stop setting to run a specified ET.  Like a Dial In , you will record weather conditions and ET for a previous run (in this case 2 runs) and input weather conditions for a future run to Predict.  Instead of telling you the ET the car will run for this Predicted Run, the program tells you how to set your throttle stop to run your desired ET. 
Matching Your Vehicle’s Performance 
The first step is to get the computer results to match your actual drag strip results.  See Example 4.2 for this.  For this example we will use the Super Gas Grand Am vehicle file in the Examples folder.  Open this file from the Vehicle Library.  This car runs about 9.65 ETs with no throttle stop.  The throttle stop is used to slow it down to running the 9.90 index of the NHRA Super Gas class. 
Open Up Throttle Stop Menu 
Once you have developed a set of vehicle specs which represent your car, click on the Throttle Stop button at the top of the 
Main Menu. These vehicle specs do not have to produce your ET and MPH exactly, but should be within a couple of MPH and a couple of tenths of the ET.  You are first given a notice to this effect as shown in Figure 4.35.  Click on Yes and you will see a screen similar to that shown in Figure 4.36. 
First, since you are starting a new sequence of runs at a new race, click on File and then New. This will blank out all the entries. 
Next, you will need 2 Previous or practice runs.  These are very important and must be obtained with 2 very different throttle stop settings.  The throttle stop settings must produce at least a .3 second difference in ET.  
The throttle stop setting is usually the time the stop is On (or has the throttles closed) you set on the throttle stop timer. This usually has the finest control and best repeatability.   
General Specs and Comments 
Method of Recording Weather Data:  For this example, we are using: 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
• 
An altimeter, which is corrected to 29.92” mercury 

• 
A mercury thermometer for air temperature 

• 
A dial hygrometer which reads out in % Relative Humidity. 

• 
Wind speed and direction you obtain from a hand held "wind speed meter and compass". 


The Method of Reading Weather Data of “Altimeter and Rel. Hum.” exactly matches your instrument package, so select it.  Note that the Barometer input is disabled.  You will enter your altimeter reading as Altimeter in feet of altitude. 
Your throttle stop timer is set to come on 3 seconds after the trans brake releases, so enter 3 for T/S Start Time. You are running in the 9.90 index class so enter 9.90 as the Index.  Also, enter .01 seconds as the Safety Margin to allow .01 seconds of insurance to prevent breaking out.  See Figure 4.36. 

Load In 2 Practice Runs 
Recommended Steps for Recording Previous Runs 
Previous Run #1:  The first run can be made with a very short throttle stop setting, perhaps only .2 seconds On.  Based on your experience, we make a run with the throttle stop timer set for .75 seconds and record the weather, 60 foot time, ET and the throttle stop setting. 
Previous Run #2:  The second run must produce at least a .3 second increase in ET.  Ideally, it will produce an ET approximately equal to or slightly slower than your desired or Index ET.  Again based on your experience, adjust the throttle stop timer to be on for say 1.5 seconds.  Make a run like this, and record the weather, 60 foot time, ET and the throttle stop setting. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
It is critical that the difference in the throttle stop settings for these 2 Previous Runs produce at least a .3 second difference in ET. 
Fill in the data for these 2 Previous Runs as shown in Figure 4.37. 

Predict Throttle Stop 
For your first round, the air continues to improve.  You measure the weather as: 
• 
1415 feet altitude or Elevation • 75 degrees 

• 
68.6 % relative humidity 

• 
7 MPH side wind 


The weather specs for both the Previous runs and the Predicted run are shown in Figure 4.37.  For this round, you are getting the left lane, which everyone is complaining is .02 seconds slower for 60 foot times.  Knowing this, you select “You enter (predict) 60 foot time below” for “Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time”, and enter 1.425, which is about .02 seconds slower (longer) than your Previous Run 60 foot times. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Chapter 4  Examples 
Click on the Clc button by Throttle Stop, and the program recommends you use a 1.326 second throttle stop setting.  Enter this number into your throttle stop timer.  Remember, because you’ve already added in a Safety Margin of .010 seconds, you do not need to adjust the 1.326 seconds for any Safety or Insurance Margin.  Use the 1.326 seconds exactly. 
Next Run 
Assume you win your first round with a 9.905 ET.  For the next round’s Throttle Stop prediction you are tempted to use your latest run to help predict a new throttle stop.  However, because the difference between Previous Run #1 and your latest run is less than .3 seconds (9.905-9.760 = .145), the accuracy would not be good and the program recommends you do not do it. Actually, the program will not even calculate a Throttle Stop setting for the Predicted run if the ETs for the Previous run are not at least .2 seconds or more.  So, from now on, simply enter the new weather conditions for each round into the Predicted Run.  Enter your estimate of 60 foot time, or let the program estimate it, and set the new Throttle Stop setting on your timer for the new weather conditions. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro can predict a throttle stop setting to run a certain ET (Index) under changing weather conditions, based on 2 previous runs with different throttle stop settings which produce at least .3 seconds difference in ET. 

• 
Using .001 Sec Increments (instead of .01 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu) lets the program make 60 foot, ET and Throttle Stop predictions in thousandths of a second. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Appendix 1:  Accuracy and Assumptions 
Background: 
The Drag Racing Analyzer Pro was developed as a: 
• 
Tool to help predict effects of certain engine and vehicle modifications for engine builders, drag racers, and performance enthusiasts. 

• 
"Theoretical Drag Strip" to allow anyone to try things which are too expensive, difficult, dangerous, or impossible with a real vehicle. 

• 
Learning aid for those who want to better understand vehicle dynamics during full power acceleration. 


The Drag Racing Analyzer will provide you an engineering estimate of what should occur when general modifications are made based on the principles of vehicle dynamics and physics.  By seeing all the specifications which go into the calculated results, you may have a false sense that the computer knows your vehicle exactly, what manufacturer's torque converter you are using, who built the chassis, what your 4 link settings are, etc.  Actually the computer does not know if the specifications are for a production Yugo or a Record Holding Funny Car. 
A good analogy to the Drag Racing Analyzer is a flow bench.  A flow bench can not predict exact torque and HP curves, but is still a vital tool for engine development.  In the same way, use the Drag Racing Analyzer results as a guide or second opinion of how your vehicle should perform under near optimum conditions. 
Iterations 
Before we talk about accuracy, it is important for you to understand the types of calculations going on inside the Drag Racing Analyzer and other sophisticated simulation programs.  A simple program could involve calculating quarter mile MPH from HP and vehicle weight: 
Quarter Mile MPH  = K1 x        Engine HP _             Vehicle Weight  


You enter an engine HP and Vehicle Weight and obtain a quarter mile MPH value.  The answer you obtain on the left side of the equation has no effect on the inputs on the right side of the equation. 
However, lets look at a simplified version of the equation which the Drag Racing Analyzer uses just to calculate the maximum potential tractive force (traction) the tires can produce. 
Max Tractive Force = Tire Friction x ( Wt on Rear Tires + Wt Transfer ) 
Where:  Wt Transfer depends on the vehicle's acceleration rate which depends on the tires Max Tractive Force. 
In this case the "Max Tractive Force" answer you get on the left side has an effect on the inputs to the equation on the right. The only way to solve equations like this is through "iterations".  Iteration is a process where you assume an answer, use that answer in the right side of the equation, calculate the actual answer and see if the actual answer is "close enough" to the answer you assumed. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Iteration Process: (For this example we will not use actual numbers since the calculations are quite complex) Assume Max Tractive Force is 3000 lbs 
Calculate that the vehicle acceleration could be .8 Gs and the Wt Transfer value is 600 lbs 
Using the Wt Transfer of 600 lbs, we now calculate that the Max Tractive Force is 3200 lbs Are assumed Max Tractive Force and calculated Max Tractive Force "close enough" (within 20 pounds) No, so do again using new Max Tractive Force answer 
Calculate that the vehicle acceleration could be .85 Gs and the Wt Transfer value is 640 lbs 
Using the Wt Transfer of 640 lbs, we now calculate that the Max Tractive Force is 3218 lbs Are assumed Max Tractive Force and calculated Max Tractive Force "close enough" (within 20 pounds) Yes, so an approximate answer is:  Max Tractive Force = 3218 lbs 
If "close enough" was 200 lbs, our first answer of 3200 lbs would have been good enough.  If "close enough" was 1 lb, it may require many more calculations to arrive at an answer which is "close enough".  If the equation is very complex and the inputs are an unusual combination, no answer may be reached no matter how many times the calculation is performed.  This is called "not converging on a solution". 
Making the tolerance ("close enough") small will produce more exact answers but will require more calculation time.  Performance Trends has selected tolerance bands for iterations which give good accuracy with reasonable calculation times, and allow the process to "converge on a solution". 
Because many of the equations within the Drag Racing Analyzer must be solved by iterations, there is no one exact answer.  All calculations are an approximation.  Therefore, do not be alarmed if an ET improvement of .002 seconds is shown for changing in Dew Point from 67 to 66, but changing from 66 to 65 showed a .004 second improvement.  These results are basically saying lowering the Dew Point results in a very small gain in ET. 
Other Vehicle Simulation Programs 
Other vehicle simulation programs are available which do not use nearly as many inputs as the Drag Racing Analyzer uses.  At first you may think these other programs are "smarter", since they do not need these additional inputs. 
However, each input the Drag Racing Analyzer uses has an effect on performance, for example Wind Direction and Wind Speed.  The other programs either are making an assumption that wind is some set value, or assume it has no effect.  By letting you adjust Wind Direction and Speed, the Drag Racing Analyzer shows you: 
• 
The change in performance due to a change in Wind conditions 

• 
Allows you greater accuracy, since you specify the wind conditions, and do not rely on the program's assumed conditions. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Major Assumptions 
To make the Drag Racing Analyzer and the specifications which describe the vehicle containable on a personal computer, several simplifying assumptions are made which are listed below.  Other approximations and assumptions exist as identified in Section 1.3 A Word of Caution and scattered throughout this manual.  Also see Assumptions in the Index. 
• 
All vehicle components are assumed to be perfectly stiff, which means: 

• 
There is no delay in engine torque getting to the tires due to driveshaft, axle or tire "wrap up". 

• 
There is no "pitch rotation" of the vehicle (front lifting, rear dropping) due to the suspension's springs or shocks. 

• 
There is no change in the Height of CG due to "pitch rotation" or the body lifting. 

• 
Engine torque changes instantaneously with a change in throttle position.  In real engines, torque changes are delayed from .1 to .5 seconds or longer from throttle changes. 

• 
The torque converter's performance is typical of production, 3 element, hydrodynamic torque converters.  Actual converters (especially those significantly modified) can have performance characteristics that can be quite different than production converters. 

• 
Clutch holding torque does not change with time, temperature or clutch wear. 


Accuracy 
From reading the assumptions above and scattered throughout this manual, it is obvious several important aspects of vehicle performance are "glossed over".  Therefore, it is impossible to make exact predictions of what will happen to your vehicle when modifications are made. 
It should be possible to adjust the Drag Racing Analyzer to match your vehicle’s performance (see Example 4.2 and Appendix 
3)to agree with your vehicle's results within .03 seconds at all points on the track.  However, even after this, a modification may not be simulated completely accurately.   
For example, you specify a higher stall converter and the program predicts a 4800 RPM stall and a .1 second ET improvement. You install the converter and obtain the 4800 RPM stall speed predicted by the Drag Racing Analyzer.  However, the converter exhibits more high speed slip (due to a poor design) than what the Drag Racing Analyzer assumes and your actual ET drops .1 second.  The program is still accurate based on its assumptions, its just that your parts do not fit its assumptions. 
.001 Sec Increments 
Increasing the time resolution  (choosing .001 Sec Increments in the Preferences menu) tells the program to do the calculations in much smaller time steps.  This does improve the mathematical accuracy somewhat.  However, it does not increase the program's overall accuracy significantly.  This is primarily due to the program’s assumptions and tolerance bands for iterations remaining the same. 
To summarize, we believe the Drag Racing Analyzer is the most precise and detailed software for predicting acceleration performance available to drag racers in this price range.  However, it's predictions can differ from your vehicle's results.  This is primarily due to the assumptions made by the program, and other points raised in this Appendix. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Appendix 2:  "General Tips" 
The following "tips" will show you how to change the Drag Racing Analyzer calculations by adjusting various inputs. 
Calibrating "Tips" 
Calibration is the process of adjusting the program's inputs to produce results which closely match a certain vehicle's drag strip results.  Example 4.2 shows this process in some detail.   
Start with a file from the Vehicle Library which somewhat closely resembles your car.  Then, modify all inputs you can measure or know for certain.  Also, choose “Computer Driven-no tire spin” as the Launch Type in the Driving Specs menu to let the computer launch the car. 
There are other specifications which you probably do not know or are difficult to measure.  These uncertain specs which will have a major impact on performance include: 
"Uncertain" Specifications 
• 
Engine Power Curve specs (unless dynamometer data is available) 

• 
Clutch Specs for manual transmissions 

• 
Converter Capacity for automatic transmissions 

• 
Converter Torque Multiplication 

• 
Converter Slip Factor 

•
 Transmission Efficiency 

•
 Tire Growth 

•
 Drag Coefficient 

• 
Tire Traction Factor 

•
 Shift Time 


Use the guidelines in Sections 2.2 - 2.7 and Example 4.2 to estimate the "uncertain" specs.  Calculate performance and compare the computer's results to your car's actual results.  Use actual results from a "good running" day, and results you feel comfortable you could repeat under the same conditions.  Then use the "tips" below bring the computer's results in line with these actual results. 
To increase the MPH, with little effect on ET 
• 
Reduce Drag Coefficient 

• 
Increase Tire Growth 

• 
Increase Engine Power Curve specs and decrease Traction Factor 


To decrease ET and 60 ft times, with little effect on MPH 
• 
Increase Traction Factor 

• 
Adjust Converter Capacity (stall RPM) for automatic transmissions 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
• 
Adjust Converter Torque Multiplication for automatic transmissions 

• 
Increase Launch RPM for manual transmissions 

• 
If Bog (engine RPM dropping too low) is a problem, try reducing Clutch Force for manual transmissions 

• 
If traction is not a problem, increase Clutch Force (or other clutch specs which produce more torque holding capability) 


To increase ET and 60 ft times, with little effect on MPH 
• 
Reduce Traction Factor 

• 
Choose Use Specs Below for the Launch Type in the Driving Specs and use the launch specs to simulate your actual launch 


To decrease ET and increase MPH, with little effect on 60 ft time 
Leave Tire Traction and other tire specs “as is” and: 
• 
Increase Engine Power Curve specs 

• 
Increase Clutch Force, lbs for manual transmissions, especially if CSlip is high in gears other than 1st gear 

• 
Increase Efficiency in the Transmission Specs menu 

• 
Decrease Shift Time in the Driving Specs menu 


To decrease ET and decrease MPH 
• Increase Converter Capacity for automatic transmissions 
To increase ET with little effect on MPH or 60 ft time 
• 
Increase Shift Time 

• 
Decrease Shift % Throttle for manual transmissions 

• 
Choose some “less than optimum” shift RPMs in the Driving Specs menu. 

• 
Change the shape of the HP curve. 


Another Tip 
By adjusting Shift RPMs, you can simulate most any acceleration.  For example, let's say you want to know the time to accelerate from 50 MPH to 80 MPH in 3rd gear.  Adjust the 2-3 SHIFT RPM until the vehicle starts 3rd gear (after the 2-3 shift) at exactly 50 MPH.  Then adjust the 3-4 SHIFT RPM until the vehicle starts the 3-4 shift at exactly 80 MPH.  The time between start and end of 3rd gear is 3rd gear's 50-80 MPH time. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Using Dynamometer Data for Engine Power Curve Specs 
Engine Power Curve specs are discussed in Section 2.2.  Dynamometer tests which measure engine performance can be done in different ways.  How the test is done can over-estimate or under-estimate the engine's torque and HP in the vehicle. 
The Drag Racing Analyzer works best if you enter steady state dynamometer results, with the engine equipped exactly as it will be in the vehicle.  "Equipped" means with the full exhaust and intake system, all accessories running like water pump, fan, etc.  "Steady state" means that engine RPM is stable (not changing) when the torque and HP are measured.  This is sometimes called a “step text”.   
Accelerating dynamometer tests, where the engine speed is constantly increasing (i.e. 300 RPM/sec), can under-estimate an engine's steady state performance.  You may think an accelerating test best represents an engine accelerating in a vehicle. However, the Drag Racing Analyzer calculates the power loss due to accelerating the engine, which changes in each gear.  See "Inertia" discussion in this Appendix. 
Rotating Inertia 
The difference between stationary and rotating mass is important for a racer to understand.  Every racer knows that the less a car weighs, the faster it can accelerate.  However, not every racer knows that removing 30 lbs from the vehicle's rotating components (wheels, tires, engine flywheel) will show a larger improvement in accelerating performance than removing 30 lbs 
from the frame or body.  
This is because not only do you have to accelerate the tires down the quarter mile,    Figure A1  Changing Rotation Inertia  
you have to get the tires to spin faster also.  The spare tire in the trunk is easier to  
 Base Inertia  
accelerate than the same tire mounted on  
the axle.  The tire on the axle has both  
 
mass and rotational inertia.  
 Reduce weight 50%  
Same Diameter  
Rotational inertia is a part's resistance to  
 Inertia is reduced 50%  
changing its rotational speed.  Jack up the  Requires only half the HP  
axle and try to spin the wheel.  Neglecting  
 to accelerate  
friction, a heavier wheel requires more  
 
force to spin than a light wheel.  In  
addition, if the mass is concentrated in the  
 Reduce Diameter 50%  
tire and less in the wheel, it will require  Same Weight  
even more force to spin.  That is because  
 Inertia is reduced 75%  
rotational inertia depends on mass and the  Requires only a quarter  
distance the mass is from the center of  the HP to accelerate  
rotation.  See Figure A1.1.  

For this reason, rotating components with small diameters, which concentrate the mass close to the center of rotation, have much less inertia.  These components consist of the driveshaft, axle shafts, etc.  Reducing the weight of these components insignificantly reduces your rotating inertia  Rotating components with larger diameters (flywheel or torque converter, wheels/tires, somewhat in the crankshaft, damper and transmission components) contain most of the vehicle's rotating inertia.  These are the components to concentrate on when trying to reduce rotating inertia. For example, removing 1 pound from the engine’s flywheel will have 100 up to 1000 times or more effect on the vehicle’s rotational inertia than removing 1 pound from an axle shaft. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Example 
Try some examples with the Drag Racing Analyzer with the GT5.0L.  The GT5.0L's Baseline performance is a 14.593 ET. 
Now, remove 40 lbs from the front wheels by setting Front Wheels/Tires WT = 10 instead of 50.  This modification simulates moving 40 lbs from the front wheels and placing it somewhere on the body, since we did not also reduce Vehicle Weight 40 lbs.  (If you have the Preference “Warn on Tire Weight Change” selected, the program will ask you if you want to change the vehicle weight by 80 lbs when you leave the Wheels/Tires menu.  Answer No for now.)  Calculate performance an we get an ET of 14.512.  Nearly a one tenth improvement just by moving weight around on the vehicle (not moving it to change traction). 
Now reduce the Vehicle Weight 80 lbs to 3120.  This simulates removing 40 lbs from each front wheel & tire and not placing it on the vehicle.  This GT5.0L's ET is now down to 14.441. 
Condition  Analyzer Modification  ET  MPH  
Baseline  No change to GT5.0L  14.593  94.97  
Remove 40 lbs from each front wheel/tire and place the weight on the body  Front Wheel/Tire Weight = 10  14.512  95.34  
Remove 40 lbs from each front wheel/tire (vehicle weight lightens up 80 lbs)  Front Wheel/Tire Weight = 10 Vehicle Weight = 3120  14.441  96.113  

(To be exact about removing 40 lbs from each front wheel/tire, the GT5.0L's % Wt on Rear Tires would have increased to 41% from the GT5.0L's original 40% Weight on the Rear.) 
Engine Inertia 
Engine inertia is more complicated than other rotating inertia on the vehicle.  It is not always best to reduce engine inertia to improve acceleration. 
That is because the engine is not "geared" directly to the road.  Engine RPM does not have to change at the same rate, or even in the same direction as vehicle speed.  When the vehicle's speed is zero, the engine could be spinning at 10,000 RPM.  Release the clutch and the engine RPM drops as the vehicle speeds up. 
Because of this difference, you can use the engine's rotating inertia to help accelerate the car.  For example, an engine's flywheel spinning a 10,000 RPM stores tremendous energy.  This energy can be used to get the vehicle accelerating once you drop the clutch.  The flywheel also releases stored energy during shifts, when engine RPM drops from the high speed of the previous gear to the lower speed in the next gear.  
The Drag Racing Analyzer estimates the rotational inertia of the engine and clutch/flywheel or converter and transmission parts based on: 
• 
Displacement in the Engine Specs menu (the higher the displacement, the higher the inertia) 

• 
Clutch Specs like # disks, diameter, clutch force (the higher these specs, the higher the inertia) 

• 
Converter Capacity (the higher the capacity, the lower the inertia because this usually means a smaller diameter converter) 


Tips on Simulating Modifications 
The previous "inertia" examples point out an error most users will make.  When you make a modification, always think of how it could affect each specification.  The example of removing 40 lbs from the front wheels not only affected Front Wheels/Tires WT, but also Vehicle Weight and % Wt on Rear Tires.  Below is a list of common modifications and the specs they may affect. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Engine Modifications 
Engine modifications can change all Engine Power Curve specs and Displacement. If the engine is naturally aspirated (not supercharged, turbocharged or uses nitrous oxide) and you increase the HP, generally the RPM where the HP will peak will increase also.  Vehicle Weight and % Wt on Rear Tires may also change if you change to aluminum components (less weight) or add a supercharger (more weight), etc. 
Adding, Removing or Shifting Weight 
• 
Vehicle Weight 

• 
% Wt on Rear Tires 

• 
Front & Rear Wheels/Tires Weight 


Changing vehicle height 
• 
Height of CG 

• 
Frontal Area, sq ft 


Changing wheels and tires 
• 
All the Wheels/Tires Specs 

• 
Vehicle Weight, lbs 

• 
% Wt on Rear Tires 

• 
Track Width 

• 
Frontal Area, sq ft 


Changing torque converter 
• 
Converter Capacity 

• 
Conv Tq Multiplication 

• 
Vehicle Weight 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Appendix 3  Backing Up Data 
Backing up data means to make more than one copy of the data which can be used or referred to at a later date.  This may be needed in the event one copy becomes lost or erased, or you need room in the Test Library.  Backing up data can take 2 basic forms:
 Paper Reports Copying files with Windows copy commands 
Other than making Paper Reports, backing up data requires knowledge of Windows File Manager (3.1) or Windows Explorer (95, 98, NT) commands.  Unless you are experienced with Windows commands, have someone experienced with Windows 
assist you to prevent losing data. 
Paper Reports: 
You can keep paper records of the vehicles you build by calculating Performance, and then printing a performance report with the vehicle specs.  See Figure A3.1.  The advantage of paper reports is the method is easy to understand.  The disadvantage of paper reports is you have to type in all the specs again. 
Copying data to disk with Windows commands: 
This method is the preferred method.  If you are not familiar with Windows commands, have someone help you the first couple of times.  However, this is the most reliable and most efficient way to back up your data. 
Note:  Unless stated otherwise, all mouse clicks are with the normal, left button on the mouse. 
To copy Entire DRPFILES Folder using Windows 95, 98, Me or NT, which contains all folders and test files in the Vehicle Library: 

Click on Start, then Programs, then Windows Explorer (usually at the bottom of the list of programs), Accessories, then Windows Explorer.  The exact one depends on your system.  You will obtain the Windows Explorer screen shown in Figure A3.2. 
Locate the PERFTRNS.PTI folder (may not be printed in capital letters) on the left side of the Windows Explorer screen, usually on the C drive.  Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the PERFTRNS.PTI folder. 
You should now see the DRP20 folder. Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the DRP20 folder. 
You should now see the DRPFILES folder. Right click on the yellow DRPFILES folder icon to display the menu of options.  Click on the Copy command to copy this entire folder (all test files in the standard Vehicle Library). 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices (C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 

Now you must tell the computer where you want to copy the files to.  Click and drag the slide bar for the left section of the Windows Explorer screen to the top.  (You can also click on the up or down arrow buttons on the slide bar.)  Look for the Floppy Drive icon, usually the “A” drive.  Put a new, formatted disk in the floppy drive.  Then right click on the Floppy Drive icon, and select Paste from the list of options.  You will see the floppy drive light come on as the entire DRPFILES folder and all its contents are copied to the floppy disk.  Label this disk with something like “DRPFILES folder, xx/xx/xx” with a name and date. 
Notes: 
Four (4) other folders contain information you may want to back up: 
• 
Engine (contains engine files you have saved) 

• 
DRPExmp (contains component example specs you have saved) 

• 
DialIn (contains dial in files you have saved) 

• 
ThrtlStp (contains throttle stop files you have saved) These folders are saved the same way that the DRPFiles folder is saved. 


You may just want to back up one particular folder in the test library (in the DRPFILES folder) or just 1 particular test.  You would do this the same as with copying the entire DRPFILES folder, just click on the [+] by the DRPFILES folder to display the folders under DRPFILES.  Then right click on the folder you want to Copy.  To find individual test files, click on the yellow folder icon containing the test file and the contents of the folder will be shown on the right side of the Windows Explorer screen.  Then right click on the test file name and select Copy. 
You can also copy individual test files to the floppy drive from inside the Drag Racing Analyzer Pro Analyzer program.  Open the file you want to copy so it is the current test file.  Then click on File at the top of the Main Screen, then select Copy to Floppy Disk.   
More experienced computer users may want to use the “Backup” features built into Windows 95 and 98 (click on Start, Programs, Accessories, System Tools, Backup).  This compresses test files so it takes fewer floppy disks.  However you need to use the Backup program to restore test files, which can be more confusing to novice computer users. 
Restoring Data 
Be very careful when restoring data, as you may overwrite Test Files with old, erroneous information.  Read all the information below before restoring data.  If you are not familiar with Windows Explorer, have someone more experienced help you. 
The ONLY reason to restore data is if you have lost test files.  This could be because you mistakenly erased it,  you had a major computer failure, or you are moving the program to another computer.  Do NOT restore data unless you have one of these problems, as you could possible create many more problems than you are trying to fix. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001 Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
When restoring test files and folders, you pretty much reverse the procedure for backing up.  First you  put your backed up floppy disk in the floppy drive.  Then open Windows Explorer, find the Floppy drive icon and click on it to display its contents. Right click on the folder you want to restore and select Copy. 
Now find the DRPFILES folder under DRP20 under PERFTRNS.PTI, usually on the C: drive.  Right click on the folder 1 level up from the folder you are restoring.  For example, if you are restoring the test file folder CHEV which was in the DRPFILES folder, you must click on the DRPFILES folder. If you are restoring the entire Test Library folder DRPFILES, you must click on the DRP20 folder. If you are restoring the test file 194-150 which was in the CHEV folder under the DRPFILES folder, you must click on the CHEV folder. 
During the restoring (copying) process, Windows Explorer checks to see if it is overwriting an existing file (Figure A3.3).  If it is, it will ask you if the existing file or folder should be overwritten.  Be very careful when overwriting files, as you may overwrite a new test file with data from an old test file of the same name.   
Before restoring test files, it is good practice to back up all test files first.  Then if you make a mistake, and overwrite test files you didn’t mean to, you have your backup copies to restore the test files from. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Index, Chapters 1-3 Only (see 2nd Index following this one for Chapter 4 and Appendices) 
4 wheel drive, 41 
60 foot time, 14, 92, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 136 60 foot, sec, 95, 99 
Accel Gs, 69, 70, 84, 120 
Acceleration, 1, 42, 48, 49, 69, 70, 74, 128 
Aerodynamics, 43, 44, 83, 84, 85 
Air Temperature, 61, 95 
All Wheel Drive, 33, 40, 41 
Altimeter, 60, 61, 62, 95, 99 
Analysis Report, 115, 116 
Arm, Clt, 36, 37 
ASCII File, 111, 112, 113, 117, 118 
Assumptions, 7, 3, 25, 26, 27, 40, 43, 47, 48, 54, 61, 63, 70, 73 
Axle Design, 41 
Axle Ratio, 7 
Barometer, 60, 61, 62, 95, 136 
Body & Axle, 6, 11, 39, 47, 48, 74, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 101, 107 
Bog (Engine), 52 
Bonneville, 62, 63, 136 
Bump, 63 
C RPM, 69 
C Slip, 70 
Calculate Performance, 6, 7, 8, 10, 59, 60, 67, 68, 75, 84, 85, 88, 89, 94, 98, 107, 109, 117 
Calculate Performance Conditions, 6, 8, 9, 10, 59, 68, 84, 85, 88, 89, 107, 109 
Calculation Menu, 6, 10, 19, 20, 71, 88, 89 
Calculation Menus, 6, 10, 19, 20, 71, 88, 89 
Centrifugal, 6, 1, 30, 31, 35, 36, 79 
CG, 42 
Chain, 40, 80, 81, 107 
Chain Calculations, 6, 1, 40, 80, 81, 105, 106, 107, 108, 
Circumference, 48, 86, 87 
Clc button, 10, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25, 40, 42, 43, 48, 49, 54, 61, 71, 72, 73, 79, 80, 82, 87, 88, 89, 94, 98, 100 
Clutch Diameter, 30 
Clutch Force, 31, 79 
Clutch Material, 30 
Clutch to Use, 36, 37 
Clutch/Converter, 30, 33 
Coefficient, lift, 44, 45, 85 
Color, 1 
Colors, Graph, 15 Comments, 7, 9, 13, 36, 94, 98, 111, 123, 129, 130 
Computer Driven (Launch), 51, 52, 55, 57 
Concrete Pad, 63 
Construction (Tire), 48, 49, 91 
Conv Slip Factor, 32 
Conv Tq Multiplication, 32, 70, 121 
Converter, 1, 2, 18, 24, 29, 30, 32, 33, 52, 53, 54, 57, 58, 69, 70, 76, 77, 91, 111, 120, 121 
Converter Capacity, 32, 57, 58, 91 
Converter Locked Up, 33 
Corr. Factor, 19 
Counter Weight, 37, 38 
Current Run, 68 
Default Floppy Disk Drive, 14 
Density Altitude, 2, 62, 136 
Dew Point, 10, 19, 61, 88, 89, 90, 95, 99 
Dial In, 6, 7, 14, 88, 89, 97, 98, 100 
Diff Lock Eff, 40 
Differential, 40, 41 
Disabled, 18, 30, 36, 43, 49, 52, 53, 54, 60, 61, 78, 106 
Displacement, 18, 72, 73, 74 
Distance, 1, 42, 48, 49, 63, 64, 68, 69, 72, 83, 87, 91, 120, 136 
Distance of Race, 91 
Dnsy Alt, 2, 136 
Drag Coefficient, 43, 44, 83, 84, 85 
Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 11, 13, 14, 20, 21, 25, 48, 49, 51, 58, 67, 91, 94, 101, 111, 112, 113, 115, 117, 118, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135 
Drag Slicks, 48, 49 
Drag Strip, 1, 3, 9, 63, 68, 69 
Driveline Layout, 40, 41, 47, 48 
Driving Specs, 6, 51, 88 
Dry Bulb, 10, 61, 89 
Dry Density Altitude, 62, 136 
Dry Dnsy Alt, 136 
Dynamometer, 19 
Dynamometers, 1, 18, 19, 73 
Edit, 21, 98, 123, 126, 138 
Efficiency, 24, 33, 41, 49, 75, 112 
Eighth Mile MPH, 73, 74 
El Mirage, 62, 63, 136 
Engine, 4, 6, 1, 8, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 40, 42, 43, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 79, 80, 81, 84, 85, 91, 92, 103, 112, 113, 120, 130, 131, 132, 134 
Engine Analyzer, 18, 19, 20, 21 
Engine Cubic Inches, 71, 74 
Engine Graph, 15 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Engine RPM, 1, 24, 32, 52, 53, 54, 55, 57, 58, 69, 70, 92, 112, 120 
EngRPM, 69 
Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time, 95, 96, 99 
ET Timer, 25, 26, 27, 58, 64, 69 
ET, sec, 95, 99 
Example, 6, 7, 4, 7, 10, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 25, 26, 30, 32, 33, 36, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 48, 52, 54, 56, 58, 60, 61, 62, 65, 68, 69, 71, 73, 78, 79, 83, 85, 91, 96, 99, 101, 102, 103, 105, 106, 107, 111, 112, 115, 121, 128, 133, 134, 135 
Examples, 6, 7, 33, 41, 43, 47, 51, 52, 54, 56, 58, 101, 102, 103, 134 
Explorer, Windows, 13, 134 
Feet, 69, 106, 120, 136 
File, 6, 2, 7, 14, 20, 94, 98, 111, 117, 118, 128, 131, 132, 133, 134 
Final Drive Ratio, 40, 71, 80, 107, 110 
Finish, 68, 73, 84, 85, 92 
Finish Engine RPM, 92 
Finish MPH, 92 
Finish Trans Gear #, 92 
Floppy Disk, 4, 14, 134 
Flywheel, 18, 24, 76 
Fonts, 15 
Force with Weights, 38 
Force, Arms Only, 38 
Front Wheel Drive, 40, 47, 48 
Front Wheel/Tire, 47 
Frontal Area, 43, 83, 84, 85, 102 
Frt Roll Stfns, 43 
Full Power Curve, 17, 18, 19, 20, 72, 73 
Gear Ratio, 33 
Graph, 1, 8, 9, 15, 20, 36, 55, 56, 57, 58, 108, 110, 111, 112, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 137, 138 
Height of CG, 42 
History, 14, 63, 105, 106, 111, 112, 113, 121, 122, 135, 136, 137 
Hood Scoop, 1, 23, 24, 36, 70, 75 
Humidity, 7, 19, 61, 88, 89, 90, 95, 99, 136 
Import Data Logger File, 6, 1, 111 Improvement, 9, 67, 68, 136 Improvement Summary, 67 Imprvmnt, 136 Include Vehicle Specs, 129 Index, 7, 94, 95, 96, 139 Index, sec, 96 Inertia, 18, 24, 47, 58, 76 Install, 4, 75, 87, 123 
Know Dew Point?, 89 Know Relative Humidity?, 88 
Last Run, 68 Launch, 31, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 70, 91, 120, 121 Launch % Clutch, 52, 53, 56, 121 Launch % Throttle, 53, 54, 56, 58, 70, 120 Launch RPM, 52, 55, 56 Launch Time, 52, 53, 55, 56, 58 Let Program Estimate Clutch Specs, 30, 31, 91 Letter Tire Size, 86 Load from Eng. Anlzr., 20 Lock Up RPM, 31, 36 
Main Menu, 7, 8, 10, 11, 20, 49, 59, 68, 87, 91, 94, 98 Match Vehicle Performance, 6, 1, 19, 49, 87, 91, 92 Method of Describing Power Curve, 18 Method of Recording Weather Data, 60, 88, 89, 95, 99 Metric Tire Size, 86 Motorcycle, 40, 41, 43, 44, 47, 48 MPH, 1, 8, 9, 24, 32, 62, 65, 68, 69, 73, 74, 75, 84, 85, 92, 94, 98, 105, 106, 110, 120, 136 
Number of Arms, 36, 37, 38 
Open, 7, 14, 32, 44, 94, 98, 111, 131, 132, 134 Optimum, 44, 54, 105 Outside Air Temp, 88, 89 
Peak Horsepower, 18, 19, 71, 72, 73 Peak HP Only, 18 Peak Torque, 18, 19, 71, 72, 73 Peak Torque and HP Only, 18 PERFTRNS.PTI, 133 Pick An Example, 101, 102 Preferences, 6, 7, 13, 14, 68, 69, 94, 98, 135 Print, 1, 9, 15, 20, 110, 113, 123, 126, 129, 130, 137 Program Title Comments, 13 Progressive Nitrous System, 26 
Quarter Mile MPH, 74 
Radius, 48, 49, 86, 87, 120 Ramp, 53, 56 Rating Type (Tire), 86 Rear Axle Ratio, 40, 71, 80, 107, 110 Rear Track Width, 42, 83 Registered Owner, 3, 4 Relative Humidity, 60, 61, 88, 89, 95, 99 Remind on Tire Wt Change, 14 Request Report Comment, 130 Ring Height, 36, 37 Rolling Radius, 48, 86, 87 Rollout, 25, 26, 27, 56, 58, 64, 68, 69 Roof Height, 83 RPM at Peak HP, 19, 72 RPM at Peak Torque, 18, 19, 72, 73 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
RPM Producing Force, 38 
Safety, 4, 3, 9, 40, 42, 84, 96, 98, 99, 100, 115 Save, 1, 7, 14, 20, 36, 94, 98, 102, 132, 133, 134, 135, 138 Save As, 20, 94, 98, 134 Setup, 4, 75, 87, 123 Shift, 19, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 65, 68, 69, 72, 128 Shift % Throttle, 54, 55, 56, 70, 120 Shift RPM, 19, 54, 55, 56, 58, 88 Shift RPMs, 19, 54, 55, 56, 58, 88 Shift Time, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58 Slicks, 48, 49 Special Timer, 6, 1, 68, 105, 110 Staged Nitrous, 26, 27, 60, 64, 68 Staging Depth, 64 Stall RPM, 2, 32, 57, 91 Stall RPM at Launch, 91 Start Time, 25, 96, 105 Static Force, 36, 37 Str Wt, 70 Suspension, 39, 40, 43, 49, 82, 87 
T Slip, 70 
T/S Start Time, 96 
Team Engineer, 1, 2, 5, 31, 35, 54, 68, 105, 110, 111, 113, 120, 121 
Tech Help, 3, 4 
Throttle Stop, 6, 7, 1, 25, 36, 62, 65, 78, 79, 88, 89, 93, 94, 95, 96 
Throttle Stop Prediction, 6, 93, 94 
Time Align, 1, 128 
Time Step for Calculations, 14 
Tire Diameter, 47, 48, 64, 71, 86, 87, 91, 92 
Tire Growth, 48, 49, 87, 91 
Tire Stagger, 64 
Total Carb CFM, 25, 77 
Total Vehicle Weight, 41, 81, 82 
TqMult, 70 

Tr Wt, 70 
Track Length, 62, 68 
Track Weather, 24, 60, 75 
Traction, 26, 40, 42, 43, 45, 48, 49, 52, 63, 70, 87, 91, 98, 99 
Traction Factor, 49, 87, 91 
Trans Brake, 25, 26, 27, 32, 52, 54, 57, 58, 65, 93 
Transmission, 6, 8, 18, 24, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 40, 41, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 69, 77, 79, 80, 81, 91, 92, 103, 120, 121 
Trap Speed, 9, 68 
Tread, 48, 86, 87 
Tread Width, 86 
U Joint, 41 Use Alternate Location for Files, 13, 14 
Veh Response Time, 65 
Vehicle Height, 43, 45 Vehicle Library, 8, 121, 131, 132, 133 Vehicle Weight, 1, 39, 41, 71, 74, 79, 81, 82 Vol Eff, 73, 74 
Weather, 1, 10, 19, 32, 36, 60, 61, 62, 70, 75, 84, 85, 89, 94, 95, 97, 98, 136 
Weather Stations, 60 
Weight Added, 36, 38 
Weight on 1 Axle, 81 
Wet Bulb, 89, 90 
Wheel/Tire, 47, 48, 87, 120 
Wheelbase, 42, 82 
Wheels & Tires Wt, 47, 48 
Which Axle?, 81 
Wind, 62 
Wind Direction, 62 
Wind Speed, 62 
Windows, 1, 3, 1, 2, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 36, 44, 111, 118, 123, 132, 133, 134 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Index, Chapter 4 and Appendices Only (see 1st Index preceeding this one for Chapters 1-3) 
60 foot time, 158, 162, 163, 164, 166, 167, 168 
Accel Gs, 170 Acceleration, 169, 170, 171, 175 Aerodynamics, 172 Air Temperature, 152, 154 Altimeter, 166 Assumptions, 163, 169, 171 Axle Design, 155 Axle Ratio, 141, 144, 145, 147, 148, 149 
Barometer, 152, 153, 154, 162, 166 Baseline, 142, 147, 175 Body & Axle, 144, 147, 153, 155, 156 Bog (Engine), 147 
Calculate Performance, 141, 142, 143, 145, 151, 152, 153, 154 
Calculate Performance Conditions, 142, 151, 152, 153, 154 
Calculation Menu, 151, 153, 156 
Calculation Menus, 151, 153, 156 
CG, 171, 176 
Chain Calculations, 148, 149, 150 
Clc button, 154, 156, 164, 168 
Clutch Force, 173 
Comments, 153, 159 
Computer Driven (Launch), 144, 157, 172 
Construction (Tire), 147, 152 
Conv Tq Multiplication, 147, 148, 155, 172, 173 
Converter, 153, 155, 169, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175 
Converter Capacity, 155, 172, 173, 175 
Dew Point, 152, 154, 170 
Dial In, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167 
Diff Lock Eff, 155 
Disabled, 154, 157, 166 
Displacement, 152, 175, 176 
Distance, 174 
Drag Coefficient, 172 
Drag Racing Analyzer Pro, 141, 149, 150, 151, 159, 161, 164, 168, 169, 179 
Drag Slicks, 147, 152, 157 
Drag Strip, 143, 144, 161, 162, 165, 172 
Driving Specs, 144, 147, 152, 157, 172, 173 
DRP.EXE, 141 
Dry Bulb, 152, 153, 154 
Dynamometers, 172, 174 
Efficiency, 172, 173 
Engine, 143, 144, 146, 147, 151, 152, 153, 155, 157, 158, 163, 169, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 179 Engine RPM, 144, 146, 147, 157, 158, 173, 174, 175 Estimate Change in 60 Foot Time, 163, 164, 167 Example, 139, 141, 142, 144, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 159, 161, 162, 163, 165, 170, 171, 172, 174, 175, 179, 180 Examples, 139, 156, 165, 173 Explorer, Windows, 141, 177, 178, 179, 180 
Feet, 143 File, 159, 161, 165, 177, 179, 180 Final Drive Ratio, 144, 147 Floppy Disk, 179, 180 Flywheel, 174, 175 Front Wheel/Tire, 156, 175 Frontal Area, 176 
Graph, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150 
Height of CG, 171, 176 History, 141, 145, 147, 150 Humidity, 153, 154, 162, 166, 167 
Index, 165, 166, 168, 171, 181, 182 Inertia, 174, 175 Install, 148 
Launch, 144, 147, 157, 172, 173 Launch RPM, 147, 157, 173 
Main Menu, 141, 142, 144, 145, 151, 152, 155, 158, 159, 161, 165 Match Vehicle Performance, 151, 158, 159 Method of Describing Power Curve, 152 Method of Recording Weather Data, 152 MPH, 141, 143, 145, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 158, 161, 162, 165, 167, 169, 172, 173, 175 
Open, 141, 151, 161, 165, 179 Optimum, 147, 157, 169, 173 
Peak Horsepower, 158 PERFTRNS.PTI, 141, 177, 180 Preferences, 142, 151, 161, 171 Print, 177 
Quarter Mile MPH, 153, 169 
Rear Axle Ratio, 144, 147 Rear Track Width, 156 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Relative Humidity, 154, 162, 166, 167 Rollout, 154 
Safety, 162, 164, 166, 168 Save, 159 Save As, 159 Sec Increments, 142, 150, 151, 161, 168, 171 Setup, 148 Shift, 143, 147, 152, 153, 157, 159, 172, 173 Shift % Throttle, 147, 173 Shift RPM, 143, 152, 173 Shift RPMs, 143, 152, 173 Shift Time, 147, 157, 172, 173 Slicks, 147, 152, 157 Stall RPM, 152, 155, 157 Start Time, 166 Suspension, 171 
T/S Start Time, 166 Throttle Stop, 165, 166, 167, 168, 179 Time Step for Calculations, 142, 151 Tire Diameter, 147, 152 Tire Growth, 172 Track Weather, 155, 165 Traction, 144, 147, 148, 150, 152, 163, 169, 172, 173, 175 Traction Factor, 152, 172, 173 Trans Brake, 166 Transmission, 152, 155, 172, 173, 174, 175 Trap Speed, 143 Tread, 147, 152 Tread Width, 147, 152 
U Joint, 155 
Vehicle Library, 142, 151, 159, 161, 165, 172, 177, 179, 180 
Vehicle Weight, 151, 153, 169, 175, 176 
Vol Eff, 153 
Weather, 142, 152, 153, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168 Weight on 1 Axle, 156 Wet Bulb, 152 Wheel/Tire, 147, 156, 157, 175 Wheelbase, 156 Wind, 152, 154, 162, 166, 170 Wind Direction, 152, 170 Wind Speed, 152, 154, 170 Windows, 141, 177, 178, 179, 180 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 2001  Drag Racing Analyzer Pro  Appendices 
Engine Analyzer v3.4B for Windows 
User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48152 248-473-9230 Fax 248-442-7750 
www.performancetrends.com 
Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Performance Trends, Inc. Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48152 
Sales & Tech Help for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230  Email: sales@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, movies, FAQs, download demos, update info, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright (C) 2024 Performance Trends, Inc.  All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by Performance Trends, Inc. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp.  1993-2024 All Rights Reserved 
IBM PC, XT, and AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp. MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. 
International Business Machines Corp. makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, regarding the enclosed computer package, its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.   
DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION OF FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE OF SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY OF OBLIGATION OF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES.  PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
Continued on next page. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS OF PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS OF ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
********************************** W A R N I N G  *********************************** The Engine Analyzer makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with engines and Engines.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-Obtaining data to input to the program
 -Interpreting the program's results Before making measurements of or modifications to any vehicle, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO:
 -Regard the safety consequences 
-Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 
-Read the entire user's manual 
-Obey all federal, state & local laws 
-Respect the rights and safety of others 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 7 
1.1 Overview of Features 7 
1.2 Before You Start 8 
1.3 A Word of Caution 9 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 10 
   1.5 Example to Get You Going                                 11 
Chapter 2 Definitions 15 
2.0 Basic Program Operation 15 2.1 Preferences 17 2.2 Short Block 19 2.3 Cylinder Head(s) 21 2.4 Intake System 27 2.5 Exhaust System 33 2.6 Cam/Valve Train 37 2.7 Supercharger 43 2.8 Calculated Performance 53 
2.8.1 Running Conditions 53 
2.8.2 Calculate Performance Test Results 59 
2.9 Calculation Menus 73    2.10 Examples 89 
Chapter 3 Output 93 
3.0 Overview 93 3.1 Analysis Report 95 3.2 ASCII Files 97 3.3 Graphs 99 
3.4 Engine Library 107 
3.5 Printer Output 111 
3.6 History Log 113 
3.7 Send to Vehicle Program 115 
Chapter 4 Examples 117 Example 4.1 “I Don’t Know My Engine’s Specs”                     119 Example 4.2 Installing Hydraulic and Solid Lifter Camshafts 129 Example 4.3 Supercharging, Turbocharging and Nitrous Oxide 141 Example 4.4 Using Flow Bench Data 149 Example 4.5 Optimizing Tuning 153 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 161 Appendix 2: Summary of 4 Cycle, Internal Combustion   Engine Theory 164 Appendix 3: Intake and Exhaust Tuning 171 Appendix 4: “Fine Tuning” Torque and HP Curves 175 Appendix 5: New Features for Version 3.2 179 Appendix 6: New Features for Version 3.4 187 Appendix 7: New Features for Version 3.4 B 203 EA Plus Supplement 217 
Index 239 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features 
The Engine Analyzer program by Performance Trends, Inc. is a software system to let engine builders, racers, performance enthusiasts, and even the average driver understand and predict many aspects of full power Engine acceleration.  The Engine Analyzer, Version 3 has been designed to be easier and more accurate.  Several new features have been added and other features enhanced. The major changes in Engine Analyzer Version 3 are listed below: 
New Features: 
• 
Mouse driven user interface compatible with Windows and Window 95 for easier operation and better print capability. 

• 
Lots more example intakes, cams, heads, etc. preloaded for you to pick from. 

• 
Can save your own example component specs. 

• 
Can load cam specs based on events at .050”, .040” (1mm) or seat timing. 

• 
Can describe ramp of cam profile, from mild hydraulic to inverted flank solid roller. 

• 
Can print most menus and calculation menus separately. 

• 
Keeps log of last 25 tests run, for comparison or recall.  You can also select to save up to 10 of these tests for as long as you wish.  You can also select to graph up to 5 of these tests with the current results. 

• 
Advanced file Open and Save commands let you access any drive or directory with standard Windows File Dialog menu. 

• 
The name of the example components is saved and displayed so you know what the specs represents (like Dart II heads, Victor Jr manifold, etc.) 

• 
Better printing of reports. 

• 
Many more options for the graphs, like zoom, shift, line styles, etc. 

• 
Improved accuracy. 

• 
On screen help by simply clicking on any input spec. 


If you require more detailed analysis or more features, you may need our Engine Analyzer "Pro".  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
Computer capable of running Windows 98, Me, XP,  2000, NT, Vista, 7 or newer 

• 
Printer (optional). 


Many terms used by the Engine Analyzer and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, like Flow Efficiency, Mach #, etc.  However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Engine Analyzer. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Engine Analyzer directory or folder.   
To read this file in Windows 3.1, double click on Notepad in the Accessories program group.  Then click on File, then Open and select All Files for the file type.  Find the Engine Analyzer directory, usually EA30 under PERFTRNS.PTI, and click on README.DOC. Notepad will display the contents. 
To read this file in Windows 95, use Windows Explorer to find the Engine Analyzer directory, usually EA30 under PERFTRNS.PTI. Then double click on README.DOC.  Wordpad will display the contents. 
A new feature also allows you to view the README.DOC file in the Engine Analyzer by clicking on Help at the main screen, then View Readme File. User Manuals and Supplements describing new features can also be viewed this way.. 
Every effort has been made by Performance Trends, Inc to provide you with an accurate, cost saving, high quality tool at a very reasonable price.  We do not copy protect our software, to allow our customers full freedom to make back-up copies for their own personal use. Please respect the programmer's copyright and do NOT give out copies to your friends.    
Important: The body of this manual covers v3.0’s features.  Check Appendix 5 and 6 for new features added in v3.2 and v3.4. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
The Engine Analyzer is a comprehensive software package which estimates a Engine's performance based on limited user input.  These estimates can be used for analysis of dynamometer, race track or normal street performance.  An engine is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible.  Therefore, several simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level.  See the Assumptions in Appendix 1.  The user must recognize: 
The software can not predict the safety of an engine modification or running situation.  Done correctly, with the proper quality parts and safety precautions, extreme engine conditions can be safe.  Done by inexperienced builders with standard or low quality parts, an engine can be a "disaster waiting to happen".  Please read and follow the "Safety Notes" as highlighted in this manual. 
The software, like any computer model, can NOT make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software is estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions within the program will limit the accuracy. 

• 
Environmental conditions, temperatures (which greatly influence intake and exhaust tuning), the combustion process, fuel mixing, etc. are rarely constant and repeatable. 

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help you understand how an engine works; what parameters are important, how parameters interact, what are the tradeoffs, etc. 

• 
Point you in the correct, general direction for making modifications. This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, time slips, books, etc.  Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense to you. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all your data input. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Computer programs are written by normal people who can make mistakes.  It's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your phone call may help us correct it.) 


Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Engine Analyzer from the website, or distribution CD to a hard drive before it will run.  To do this from a CD, simply install the CD in your CDRom drive and the Performance Trends Installation Wizard should automatically start, allowing you to install the Engine Analyzer and demos of any of our other products. 

run, then click on Start, and find your CD drive.  SETUP.EXE on the CD Installation Wizard. If wizard, go into the the Engine Analyzer-
of the SETUP program.  click on OK for each the default answers program.  Once you have Analyzer, there should be icon on your desktop.  Start (lower left corner of 
Entering Registered Owner's Name:  During your first setup, the Engine Analyzer will ask you to enter your name as the Registered Owner. During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied.  Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card.  Click on About in the Main Menu to review your name and code # . 
Then you must unlock the program (take it out of demo mode) by entering the correct working code given to you by Performance Trends. This code is based on the Registered Name and Registered Code number, and could have come on paperwork or in an email sent to you from Performance Trends.  If you do not have this working code, email feedback@performancetrends.com the Exact Registered Name and Registered Code and we will email your working code.   
You will enter the working code by clicking on File (upper left corner of the program), then Unlock Program.  Depending on the version of program you purchased (std or Plus) you will get a different working code.  This code works on ALL computers as long as you use the same Reg Name. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Engine Analyzer, click on the Desktop icon or, click on Start, then Programs, then Perf. Trends, and then Engine Analyzer. After some brief introduction screens, you will be left at the Main Screen shown below. 
Figure 1.1 Main Screen 

302-4V is name of Engine Specs currently being worked with 
Click here to display all engine saved in Engine Library 
Click here 
to display 
the menu 
shown in 
Figure 1.2 
From this main menu, you can:                                       
• 
Choose to review or modify any of the categories of Engine specifications displayed. 

• 
Open or Save a file of complete Engine specifications by clicking on the Open or Save buttons (first 2 buttons on the left) or the File menu item, then either Open or Save. 

• 
Add, edit or review Engine comments to describe the Engine currently held in the program.   

• 
Calculate Engine performance from the options listed under Calculate Performance.  From here you can specify calculation options (barometric pressure, humidity, RPMs to run, etc.). 

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for you. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help or pressing <F1>. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit, or click on the Quit button. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
In the Main Screen’s blue title bar you will notice the current Engine is [302-4V].  The program has descriptions of Engines saved in 
the Library right from Performance Trends.  The current file from the Engine Library is called 302-4V.  
To get started, let's examine (but not change) the various categories of specs.  Click on a button for one of the categories like Engine, Transmission, etc.  A new menu will appear displaying the various specs and the current values for the 302-4V Engine.  You can click on the name of any spec and a brief description appears in the Help frame, along with a page #  from this manual for more help. You can return to the Main Screen by clicking on OK or clicking on an area outside this menu. 
Now click on the Calculate Performance button in the Main Screen to calculate performance for this 302-4V Engine.  The next menu will show you the Running Conditions menu as shown in Figure 1.2. 

For now, leave all the Running Conditions as they are and click on the Calculate Performance button.  This will start the program calculating performance for the specifications of the 302-4V stored in the Engine Library with the Running Conditions currently displayed.  A progress bar graph shows how the calculations are progressing.  The calculations may require several seconds on slower computers.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Figure 1.3 Calculated Results Results Summary 

Summary of important Notes of Interest.  Click on Notes button for more info. 
Tabular results which change with RPM, like dyno results. 
Special Calc­ulation results which do not change with RPM, like idle vacuum, dis­placement, etc. 
The final results will appear in a table as in Figure 1.3.  The rows are for various types of readings (Brk Tq, Brake HP, etc) which occurred at the RPMs you requested in the Running Conditions menu. 
The results contain much information, some which may not be familiar to you.  However, the first three rows do look familiar: 
• 
RPM 

• 
Brk Tq 

• 
Brake HP 


If you look at these rows, you see a maximum or peak Brk Tq of 268 ft lbs at 3000 and 3500 RPM, and a maximum or peak HP of 219 HP at 4500 RPM.  If you look in the upper right corner you see a Summary of the Current and Last performance, including the Avg Tq and Avg HP for these runs.  Boy it sure is easier and cheaper than dyno testing! 
The menu bar and the command buttons at the top of the screen shows some of the options for various formats for data output: 
• 
Analyze will produce a report of performance and safety tips on the test results 

• 
Graph will produce various types of graphs. You can also compare the current results to results of the previous run, or some other Baseline you have saved. 

• 
Print lets you print these results on your printer. 


If you have a printer hooked up to your computer, try the Print command by clicking on Print in the menu bar or on the Printer button. A small menu of printout options are presented.  These options allow you to enter a report comment, include Engine specs and comments in the printout, etc.  These options are explained in Section 3.5.  For this first time, accept the default settings and print the report by clicking on Print Results. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

Click here or press the F1 key for general help on what your options are at this point in the program. 
By clicking on a number in the results, an explanation and definition is given, including a page number in this manual for more information. 
Help is also available by clicking on output in Special Calcu­lations section. 
To help explain the other columns of output, simply click on those results.  A definition of that particular data will be presented in a Message box as in Figure 1.4. Then click on OK when you have read the definition. 
For a detailed explanation of all the results, Running Conditions, and output options, go to Section 2.8 and Chapter 3. 
Clicking on Back or pressing the <ESC> key will return you to the Main Screen.  From the Main Screen you can modify the 302-4V to see the effect on performance.  For example you could go into any of the component menus and: 
• 
Change to a different cam. 

• 
Install a turbo or supercharger. 

• 
Change weather conditions. 


The beauty of the program is that it repeats exactly each time.  This lets you find differences which would be “clouded” by changes in weather conditions or test-to-test variability. 
Many of the input specifications you see in the various menus may not be familiar to you.  For a brief definition of the inputs, simply click on the specification name.  The definition will appear in the Help frame with a page # in this manual for more information. 
Some of the Engine specifications have “Clc” buttons.  One example is Dew Point in the Running Conditions menu.  “Clc” stands for "calculate".  For example, if you want to calculate the Dew Point from wet and dry bulb readings, simply click on the Clc button.  The program will display a new menu listing the inputs and the Calc Dew Point from these inputs.  For further explanation, click on the Help buttons in these menus. To use the Calc Dew Point calculated from these inputs, click on the Use Calc Value button.  Otherwise click on Cancel to return to the Running Conditions menu with no change to Dew Point.  Section 2.9, Calculation Menus explains all these calculations. 
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various performance calculations, read Section 
3.4 of this manual called Engine Library to learn how to save a set of Engine specifications or recall information which has been previously saved. Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Figure 2.1 shows the Engine Analyzer’s Main Screen with explanations of your options here.  Figure 2.2 shows the Head(s) Specs menu with explanations of options for most component menus. 
See Appendix 5, 6 and 7 for new features on the Main Screen, including adding a picture file image. 
Figure 2.1 Main Screen Options 
Menu bar. Click here for “drop down” 


Buttons to display 
menus of program options, some being 
individual menus the same as the Command Buttons. 
containing engine 
Name of current engine file
specs. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 



2.1 Preferences 
See Appendix 5, 6, and 7 for many new Preferences which have been added. 
Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Screen screen to drop down the Preferences shown in Figure 2.3.  Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. 

Beginner/Experienced User 
If you select Beginner, the program will lock out or hide the more complicated features, make more checks on specs assuming you could be making mistakes, and gives more explanation before an action is performed (assuming you may not be familiar with it). We strongly recommend this choice to anyone new to computers or this program. 
Calc CCs from Dia when Port Len Changes Calc Dia from CCs when Port Len Changes 
In the Head Specs menu, inputs are available for Average Port Diameter, Port Volume in CCs and Port Length which are all mathematically related.  If you change Port Length, either the Volume must change if the Diameter does not change, or the Diameter must change if the Volume does not change. This option determines which assumption is made and which input (Diameter or Volume) is changed when you change the Port Length. 
Show Comparison when Picking Examples Don’t Show Example Comparison 
When you pick examples specs, the program can show a side by side comparison of the new Example specs versus the current specs before the new Example specs are loaded.  Selecting “Don’t Show Example Comparison” omits this step and saves time. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Set Default Test Pressure (currently xx.x”) 
For several calculation menus, flow bench test pressure is an input.  The program automatically loads in the Default Test Pressure, usually 28” water.  If you consistently use a flow bench test pressure different than this Default Test Pressure, you can change it here to most anything between 5-60” water. Click on this menu item and the program will ask you for a new Default Test Pressure. 
Restart Displaying Help Tips 
You will notice several tips displayed during running the program, many with a Check Box which says “Don’t Show This Again”.  Once you are aware of a tip, you do not want to be shown it again, so click on this check box to “X” it, then click on OK. 
If you ever want to review a tip, click on this menu item, and all tips will be displayed again at the appropriate time in the program, just as when the program was new, before you  checked “Don’t Show This Again”. 
Don’t Show Valve Open/Close Events Show Valve Open/Close Events 
Asking to Show Valve Open/Close Events tells the program to show and update valve opening and closing events in the Cam/Valve Train menu.  You can also then enter Opening and Closing events and have the Duration and Centerline determined from these inputs. 
Asking to Don’t Show Valve Open/Close Events simplifies the Cam/Valve Train menu for many users. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.2 Short Block 
The Short Block specs describe the engine's size, pistons, rings, bearings and front end accessories.  It also displays important engine volumes calculated from the current Short Block menu and Compression Ratio from the Cylinder Head(s) menu.  By changing Bore, Stroke and # of Cylinders, you can immediately see the effect on cylinder displacement, total engine displacement, and clearance volume (assuming Compression Ratio stays fixed). 

Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs Below and enter in most any combination of Short Block Specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Short Block Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Short Block specs you have picked. 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue  (or hidden if you are in Beginner User mode).   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
Bore, inches 
The diameter of the cylinder measured in inches.  Click on the Clc button to calculate a Bore to produce a certain Cubic Inches for a given Stroke and # of Cylinders.  See Section 2.9.1. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Stroke, inches 
The distance the piston travels from TDC (top dead center) to BDC (bottom dead center) measured in inches. Click on the Clc button to calculate a Stroke to produce a certain Cubic Inches for a given Bore and # of Cylinders.  See Section 2.9.2. 
# Of Cylinders 
The number of cylinders for the engine.  For example, for a V-8 this number is 8, for a single  cylinder engine this number would be 
1. 
Rod Length, in 
The distance from the center of the wrist pin bore to the center of the crank journal bore measured in inches.  This spec is not used in Beginner User mode as it has a small effect on performance. 
Accessories 
Front end accessories "rob" the engine of significant power which could otherwise be used to power the vehicle.  Click on the down arrow button of this combo box to pick the description of the accessories on your engine.  Generally, the further down the list you go, the more or larger accessories that are assumed and the more power “robbed” from the final brake torque and HP numbers.  
Crankcase 
This combo box lets you pick a general design of the crankshaft as far as windage drag is concerned.  Windage can rob significant amounts or power from the engine, especially at high speed.  Pick from the following designs. 
• 
High Oil Drag is where there is higher than normal drag, like oil overfill or excessive foaming where the crank actually hits the oil level. 

• 
Typical windage would be a typical production design without provisions to minimize windage (like scrapers, windage tray, deep sump, etc.) 

• 
Low windage would be where provisions have been made to minimize windage (like scrapers, windage tray, deep sump, etc.) 

• 
Low Case Pressure is where a small air pump is used to reduce crankcase pressure significantly to over 10” mercury vacuum.   

• 
Dry sump systems where the crankcase is evacuated to a low crankcase pressure (over 10” mercury vacuum). 


Pistons/Bearings 
Piston and bearing size and design have a large impact on internal engine friction.  Engine friction also robs power from appearing at the flywheel, especially at high RPM. Generally, the smaller the bearings in width and diameter, the smaller the piston skirt, and the smaller and lower tension the piston rings, the lower the friction.  However, small skirts and bearings will likely have reduced durability and reliability.   

The program makes no assessment of the safety or reliability of a particular combination. This must be decided by an experienced engine builder and the part’s manufacturers. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.3 Cylinder Head(s) 
The cylinder head specs affect intake and exhaust flow potential, compression ratio and the combustion chamber. 
See Appendix 5, 6, and 7 for new features, including new Plus version features. 

General Specs: 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs Below and enter in most any combination of  Head Specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Head Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Head specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue  (or hidden if you are in Beginner User mode).   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chamber 
This combo box lets you pick a general chamber design.  This spec affects: 
• 
How well the chamber burns the air/fuel mixture for various compression ratios. 

• 
Spark plug location and number of spark plugs which affects burn rate. 


This spec does NOT affect flow as that is described by the Flow Efficiency data described later. 
Table 2.1 Descriptions of Chamber Designs 
Type  Description  
Typical Wedge  Wedge chamber with spark plug significantly offset from the center, high compression requires significant piston popup, squish/quench area does NOT have extremely tight clearance and is a low percent of the total chamber  
Compact Wedge  Wedge chamber with spark plug more centrally located, high compression does not requires significant piston popup, squish/quench area does have extremely tight clearance (.040­.060” depending on RPM range) and is a high percent of the total chamber, valve angles generally have to be reduced for this type of chamber.  
Hemi  Hemispherical chamber with centrally located spark plug, large domed pistons, squish/quench area does NOT have extremely tight clearance (.040-.060”, depending on RPM range) and is not a high percent of the total chamber.  
Flat Head  Large chamber with valves and spark plug off to the side of the bore.  
Pent Roof  Similar to hemi, but for most typical 4 valve engines.  
Dual Plug option for all designs listed above  Select the dual plug version of one of the chamber designs above if it has 2 spark plugs which fire at approximately the same time but at different locations in the chamber  

Compression Ratio 
The engine's compression ratio based on cylinder clearance volume and total cylinder swept volume (sometimes called static compression ratio).  Do not use compression ratios which are corrected for cam timing, weather or supercharger boost. 
Compression Ratio = Clearance Volume + Swept Volume Clearance Volume 
Clearance Volume and Swept Volume must be in the same units, both either CCs or cubic inches.  Multiply CCs by .061 to obtain cubic inches, multiply cubic inches by 16.39 to obtain CCs. 
Since Compression Ratio has a Clc button, see Section 2.9.3 for calculating Compression Ratio from clearance volume, piston dome volume, deck height and gasket thickness. 
Cyl Vol, cu in 
This is the cylinder volume in cubic inches calculated from the current Short Block Specs.  This value is displayed for your information to see how Compression Ratio is calculated and can not be changed here directly, but only by changing the Short Block specs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chamber ccs 
This is the volume of the total combustion chamber (head chamber, piston dish or dome, gasket thickness volume, etc.  This value is displayed for your information and is calculated from the current cylinder volume and Compression Ratio, and can be changed here directly. 
Intake Port Specs: 
Layout 
Identifies if there are 1 or 2 intake valves per cylinder and how many ports there are for this number of intake valves.  If 2 valves are specified, both valves are assumed to be equal size and opened exactly the same.  If 2 ports are specified, the program also assumes the intake manifold has the same number of runners.  Therefore, if you have 2 valves per cylinder, and the ports from these valves siamese (run into each other) in the head or right after the head, specify the number of ports as 1. 
Valve Diameter, in 
Is the outside (largest) diameter of the head of the intake valve(s) in inches.  This is not throat area. 
Avg Port Diameter, in 
Identifies the average inside diameter of the intake port(s) over their entire length in the cylinder head.  Usually this can be measured at the end of the port which mates to the intake manifold.  A more precise way is to calculate the diameter by measuring the port volume and port length.  If you know port CCs, enter it in the spec below, first making sure the Port Length is accurate. 
If the ports are oval or rectangular, or you know the port volume in CCs and length, click on the Clc button described in section 2.9.3, to calculate the effective diameter.  If you set the number of ports to 2, this is the diameter of only 1 of these ports.  These ports are assumed to be the same length and diameter. 
Port Volume, CCs 
Is the volume of the intake port in CCs (cubic centimeters).  This value can be input directly (then the Avg Port Diameter changes to match this volume and the Port Length spec).  Also, if you enter or change the Avg Port Diameter, this value will be calculated based on that diameter and the current Port Length spec. 
If you  set the number of ports to 2, this is the Volume of only 1 of these ports.  These ports are assumed to be the same length and Volume. 
Port Length, in 
Is the length of the intake port (down the center of the port) from the intake valve to the end of the head port (the start of the intake manifold runner).  For many common heads, 4.5"-6" is a typical length.  This spec, combined with the Intake Manifold Runner Length, has a significant impact on intake tuning and therefore performance. Try to be reasonably accurate inputting this value. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Flow Efficiency, % 
The flow capacity of the heads can be described by a combination of the valve area (diameter) and the Flow Efficiency.  The total flow capacity of the intake port and valve has a substantial impact on performance.  Precise information for a particular head design is only available from flow tests on a flow bench.  A flow bench is a device which will maintain a constant pressure drop across the port and measure the amount of air flow the pressure drop produces.  CFM (Cubic Feet per Minute) flow measurements are usually made with the valve at various lifts.  From this data and knowing the valve diameter, flow efficiencies can be calculated.   
As valve lift increases, the valve opening area (curtain area) increases, flow increases and the flow efficiency changes somewhat.  See Figures 2.8.  This continues until valve lift is approximately equal to 1/4 the valve's diameter.  This lift is also called an L/D (ratio of valve lift to valve diameter) of .25 . At this point the valve area stops increasing with lift.  The minimum flow area is now the valve throat, not the "curtain area" around the circumference of the valve.  Additional valve lift gives no increase in valve area, although flow may still increase somewhat. 
The flow efficiency at a valve lift of L/D=1/4 (ratio of valve lift to valve diameter) is the one which the Engine Analyzer uses to estimate the valve's entire flow curve.  Flow efficiencies at L/D=1/4 can vary from 20% for a restrictive port/valve up to 75-80% for the best, latest racing technology. 
It is best to have flow bench data for the cylinder heads being used to calculate the Flow Efficiency as shown in Section 2.9.5.  The next best estimate of Flow Efficiency is by picking an Example Head.   
If you can not find your head or a similar head in these Examples, use Table 2.2 for a general idea for estimating Flow Efficiency. You can also obtain estimates in the program similar to Table 2.2 by clicking on the Clc button, then answering No that you do not have flow bench data.  You will be presented with a list of simple descriptions of ports with typical Flow Efficiencies for you to pick from. 
Table 2.2: Estimate Intake Flow Efficiency  
Description (years engine was designed)  Flow Effcy  
1930s and 1940s Production, domestic Flatheads  20-25%  
1930s and 1940s ported production Flatheads  25-30%  
1930s and 1940s racing Flatheads  30-40%  
1950s production, domestic OHV  25-35%  
1950s ported production OHV  35-45%  
1950s racing OHV  40-45%  
1960s and 1970s production, domestic OHV  35-40%  
1960s and 1970s ported production OHV  40-45%  
1960s and 1970s racing OHV  45-60%  
1960s and 1970s production, domestic OHC  40-45%  
1960s and 1970s ported production OHC  45-50%  
1960s and 1970s racing OHC  50-65%  
1980s production, domestic OHV  42-47%  
1980s ported production OHV  47-52%  
1980s racing OHV  52-70%  
1980s production, domestic OHC  45-50%  
1980s ported production OHC  50-55%  
1980s racing OHC  55-72%  
1990s production, domestic OHV  45-50%  
1990s ported production OHV  50-55%  
1990s racing OHV  55-72%  
1990s production, domestic OHC  47-52%  
1990s ported production OHC  52-57%  
1990s racing OHC  57-75%  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Table 2.3: Examples of Valve Flow Efficiency    Description & Source    Effcy% Dia Effcy% Dia Stock "461" SB Chevy, Hot Rod 3/88 Stock "993" SB Chevy Open Chmbr, Vizard * Stock "186" SB Chevy Clsd Chmbr, Vizard * 42.3    Bow Tie SB, CNC Portd 24502482, Cir Trk 9/93  Dart II SB Chev, C.I., Hot Rod 3/88 Lt Pt BB Chev, C.I. Oval Port, Perf Trnds    Portd BB Chev, C.I. Rect Port, SS&DI 6/81     Lt Pt BB Chev Merlin Iron. Oval Port, PrfTrns    Portd Dart Alum 360 BB Chev, Sonny's Racing   Stock AR SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 Portd AR SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 Stock TFS SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 49.8 Portd TFS SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 56.1 Stock 1970 351W SB Ford, C.I., SprFrd 8/89 44.2 Portd 70 Boss 302 Trans Am, Perf Trends Briggs & Stratton, 5 HP, Perf Trends    Pont RamAir III Stock, HP Pont 4/91 (adj) **     Stock Mopar 360A, P4529589, Hot Rod 11/91     Stock Mopar 440B, 452, Perf Trends Light Portd Mopar 440B, 452, Perf Trends Stock Mopar 440B, 240618, Perf Trends 426 Hemi Ported, SS&DI 6/81 1600 cc VW Stock Dual Port, Novak & Ass. 48.2    1600 cc VW Stock Dual Port 041, Novak & Ass.  1600 cc VW (aftermarket) AC910, Novak & Ass.  Int Exh         Flow Valve Flow Valve43.9 2.02 41.0 1.60 44.9 1.94 38.9 1.60 1.94 46.6 1.50 60.5 2.15 72.2 1.62 53.8 2.02 54.6 1.60 49.5 2.19 40.0 1.88 50. 2.30 46. 1.90 47.9 2.19 44.5 1.88 57.4 2.30 56.1 1.90 46.4 1.94 43.9 1.60 54.1 1.94 61.4 1.60 1.94 40.0 1.60 1.94 63.7 1.60 1.84 39.7 1.54 51.0 2.19 44.0 1.71 24.5 1.12 29.4 .99 40.9 2.11 39.5 1.77 41.8 2.02 48.2 1.60 42.9 2.08 41.3 1.74 46.5 2.14 51.7 1.74 53.7 2.08 47.1 1.88 60. 2.25 56. 1.94 1.40 38.5 1.26 42.8 1.54 46.4 1.26 45.5 1.97 50.7 1.50  

*  How to Build & Modify Chevrolet Small Block V-8 cylinder Heads, David Vizard, Motorbooks   
 International, 1991.  
**  Adjusted down to match other sources of stock Pontiac flow data  

Many additional heads are loaded in the cylinder Head(s) Examples.  If you have flow bench data at approximately L/D=.25 , click on the Clc button to calculate Flow Efficiency as described in Section 2.9.5. 
Note: 
The total flow potential of a port depends not only on the flow efficiency, but also on the number of valves per cylinder and the valve diameter.  A very good Flow Efficiency (at L/D=.25) of say 60 to 75%  does not mean the port/valve is not restrictive and limiting power. What it means is to flow more air, you probably must increase the valve size.  See Figure 2.7. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.7 Illustration of Valve Size (Diameter), Flow Efficiency, and Effect  of Flow Bench Air Flow and Engine HP Potential 
Large Valve, 2” Dia Larve Valve, 2” Dia Small Valve, 1” Dia Large Flow Effcy, 60% Small Flow Effcy, 30% Large Flow Effcy, 60% Bench Flow = 280 CFM Bench Flow = 140 CFM Bench Flow = 70 CFM HP Potential = 600 HP Potential = 380 HP Potential = 270 

Important: Plus version adds the ability to include a full flow curve. 
Exhaust Port Specs: Layout 
See Layout in Intake Port Specs earlier in this chapter. 
Valve Diameter, in 
See Valve Diameter in Intake Port Specs earlier in this chapter.  
Flow Efficiency, % 
See Flow Efficiency in Intake Port Specs earlier in this chapter.  
Note:  Generally, exhaust valves have better Flow Efficiencies, by about 5%.  This does not mean the exhaust flows more air, because the exhaust valve is generally smaller.  It means the exhaust flows better for the size valve it is. This may be because the exhaust flows out of the cylinder or because the smaller valve is less shrouded by the bore. 
Important: Plus version adds the ability to include a full flow curve. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.4 Intake System 
The intake system specs affect intake tuning, restrictions, manifold heating, fuel metering and fuel mixture quality. 
See Appendixes 5 and 6 for new features added in v3.2 and v3.4. 
Manifold Specs (x runner/cyl) 

The "x runner/cyl" depends on the current value of  Layout choice under Intake Port specs in the Head(s) menu.  If x=2, then the Manifold Spec of Runner Diameter describe only 1 of the 2 intake manifold runners for each cylinder. 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select a general type of manifold and the program will estimate the specs.  This is useful when you can not find an Example close to your engine and you do not know your manifold’s specs. 

• 
You can select the Use Specs Below and enter in most any combination of  Manifold Specs. 

• 
You can select the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Manifold Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Manifold specs you have selected. 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how the Manifold section of this menu looks.  If you choose one of the Typical manifolds, all Manifold specs will be disabled (printed in gray) and you can not change them.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue.  In Beginner User mode, disabled specs or specs printed in blue are hidden. 
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Manifold Type 
This combo box lets you pick the type of intake manifold design and the type of fuel delivery system.  This will determine what percent of the carburetor or throttle body is available to each individual cylinder and the type and strength of the intake tuning effects. 
Table 2.4 Descriptions of Manifold Types 
Manifold Type  Description  
Dual Plane -carb(s)  This manifold type is where half of the engine's cylinders "see" only half of the carburetor and are isolated from the other half of the cylinders.  This type of manifold gives a stronger fuel metering signal at low speed, because each induction pulse goes to a carburetor only half as big as the entire carburetor. Most production carburetor systems are of this type for engines larger than 4 cylinders. Dual plane intakes on engines with 6-10 cylinders also exhibit some "secondary" or low speed tuning effects.  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.2. A carburetor is the fuel metering device.  
Single Plane - A single plane manifold is where all cylinders can draw from all carburetor  
carb(s)  barrels.  For this reason, this manifold offers lower flow restriction at higher air flows (high RPM). These types of intakes on V- 8s tend to have shorter runners than either dual plane or tunnel ram manifolds. A "Street" single plane is one where tuning has been compromised to also provide hood clearance, good part throttle fuel distribution, good throttle response and cold weather operation, etc. Also see Tunnel Ram -carb(s) below. Single plane intakes on engines with 2-4 cylinders also exhibit "secondary" or low speed tuning effects. See Appendix 3 and Example 4.2. A carburetor is the fuel metering device.  
Tunnel Ram -carb(s)  This type of single plane manifold has been designed for optimum intake tuning and low flow restriction. Single plane intakes on engines with 2-4 cylinders also exhibit "secondary" or low speed tuning effects.  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.2. A carburetor is the fuel metering device.  
Single Plenum - This type of production intake system is characterized by one injector  
EFI  dedicated to each cylinder and one large plenum which supplies air to all cylinders. Generally these intakes have been optimized for tuning effects, since fuel distribution and carb "pump shot" lag are no longer a concern. These systems generally have runner lengths in the 8 to 20 inch range. Injected intakes on engines with from 2-4 cylinders also exhibit "secondary" or low speed tuning effects. See Appendix 3 and Example 4.2. Fuel injection is the fuel metering device and a throttle body meters air.  
Split Plenum - This type of manifold is very similar to the Single Plenum-EFI above  
EFI  except it has a split plenum, each side supplying air to only half of the cylinders. This type of fuel injected intake is usually used on engines with 6 or more cylinders to produce “secondary” tuning effects for improved low speed torque.  
Ind Runner - This manifold type has all cylinders completely isolated from one another.   
carb(s)  This type of system generally offers the best potential for intake tuning.  However, these systems can be restrictive, even with a large Total CFM Ratings. For example, each cylinder can draw from a 600 CFM carb on a single plane, V-8 manifold. However, each cylinder could only draw from a 75 CFM carburetor (one eighth of 600 CFM) with an individual runner system with a Total CFM Rating of 600. Individual runner manifolds will exhibit no "secondary" or low speed tuning effects.  If you specify # Of Cylinders as 1 in the Short Block specs, the program assumes an individual runner system, no matter what type is selected here. This system uses carburetors as the fuel metering device.  
Ind Runner -fuel inj  This type is like Ind Runner - carb(s) except fuel injection is the fuel metering device and individual port throttles meter air.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Runner Diameter, in 
Identifies the effective, average inside diameter of the intake manifold runner(s).  If the runners are oval or rectangular or you know the runner volume and length, click on the Clc button as described in section 2.9.4, to calculate the effective average diameter.   
The program assumes the same number of intake manifold runners per cylinder as you specify in the Layout in the cylinder Head(s) menu.  The Runner Diameter is the diameter of only 1 of the runners.  All runners are assumed to be the same length and diameter. 
Runner Length, in 
Is the length of the intake runner from the cylinder head port to the first "abrupt enlargement" of the runner upstream of the cylinder head. The "abrupt enlargement" can be several different things: 
• 
The intake manifold plenum.  The plenum is the open area where all the runners merge, directly under the carburetor(s) or after the throttle body on fuel injected manifolds.  The best example of a plenum is the very evident "box" on "tunnel ram" type manifolds. 

• 
The end which is open to atmosphere (or air cleaner) on individual runner fuel injection or carburetion.  For "individual runner" carb systems, the runner length actually extends through the carb and through any velocity stack or air horn. 

• 
Any point where a runner from one cylinder merges with a runner from another cylinder. 


Most production, carbureted manifolds have runners from 3 to 12 inches in length.  Manifolds for modern, production fuel injected engines generally have longer runners (8-20 inches) to take advantage of intake tuning effects at mid-range RPMs. Most manifolds have runners which vary in length from cylinder to cylinder.  Use the average length of all the runners, or the average of the longest and shortest runner for this spec. 
Flow Efficiency 
Is similar to the Flow Efficiency number for the valve in the Head(s) menu, but describes the design of the runner within the intake manifold.  This does not describe the size or length of the runners, as they have been described by other specifications.  This specification says "for its particular size, how well is the intake runner designed".  Obviously, sharp bends to clear a distributor or provide for hood clearance, rough irregular surfaces, or abrupt changes in runner size where the intake manifold mates to the head, are undesirable from a restriction and tuning point of view.  See Figure 2.10. 
A general rule for a good manifold (and port) design is one where you can see the entire intake valve for all cylinders from the carburetor or throttle body. This type of design would likely have a Flow Efficiency of 100%, indicating virtually no restriction due to the manifold 
design.  Use Table 2.5 to
 Fig 2.9 Illustration of Restriction Level vs Runner Flow Efficiency  
estimate the Runner 

Flow Effcy.
 High 
Level of      Restriction      Or Power Loss
 Low 
0 60 70 80 90 100               Flow Efficiency   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Table 2.5 Estimates of Runner Flow Efficiency 
Manifold Description  Est Flow Efficiency, %  
Production, carbureted manifolds  60 to 75%  
Production manifolds for individual cylinder fuel injection  65 to 85%  
Aftermarket, dual plane intake manifolds  70 to 95%  
Aftermarket, single plane, “X” type or “tunnel ram” manifolds  85 to 100  
Race single plane (sheet metal, custom design)  100%  

Runner Flow Efficiency is different from Valve Flow Efficiency in  that Runner Flow Efficiency has a very "non-linear" relationship to restriction.  This means that the difference in restriction between flow efficiencies of  60% to 70% is much greater than the difference between 90% to 100%.  Figure 2.9 shows that most change in restriction level occurs between Runner Flow Efficiencies of 60 to 80%, and that a Flow Efficiency less than 60% is very unusual. 
Runner Flow Efficiency not only affects flow restriction, but has a strong influence on intake tuning.  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.6. 
See Section 2.9.6 for how to calculate Runner Flow Efficiency from flow bench data by clicking on the Clc button.  Even if you do not have flow bench data, review Section 2.9.6 for an understanding of how the flow capacity of the head’s ports relate to the intake manifold’s Runner Flow Efficiency. 
You can also click on the Clc button to pick typical examples of Flow Efficiency from a list. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Intake Heat 
This combo box lets you pick the method of heating the intake manifold for improved fuel atomization, fuel distribution and cold weather operation.  Use the Table 2.9 to estimate Intake Heat. 
Table 2.6 Descriptions of Intake Heat Ratings 
Description  Type of Intake Heat  
Production carbureted manifolds heated by exhaust gas and/or engine coolant.  Prod (full heat)  
Production individual cylinder fuel injection manifolds or carbureted manifolds with blocked exhaust crossover.  Reduced Heat  
Manifolds with no source of engine heat; fuel injection or carbs with individual stacks; manifolds which have no coolant passages, exhaust crossover, and are insulated or isolated from the lifter valley.  No Heat  

Carburetor(s) Throttle Body(s) 
The title of this section of the Intake System Specs menu is determined by the choice of Manifold Type. 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs Below and enter in most any combination of  Carburetor or Throttle Body Specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Carburetor or Throttle Body Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example  Carburetor or Throttle Body specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how the Carburetor or Throttle Body section of this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue  (or hidden if you are in Beginner User mode).   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Total CFM Rating 
Is the air flow rating of the carburetor(s), or throttle body(s) if the engine is fuel injected.  The flow rating is measured in CFM (Cubic Feet per Minute) maintaining a 1.5" Hg (inches of mercury) pressure drop across the carburetor or throttle body.  Standard CFM at 1.5" Hg pressure drop (20.4" water is the standard method of rating 4 BBL carburetors.  Standard CFM ratings for 2 BBL and 1 BBL carburetors are measured with a 3" Hg pressure drop and must be converted to the 4 BBL rating before they will be accurate in the Engine Analyzer program.  Use the .71 conversion as shown below: 
2 BBL CFM Rating x .71 = 4 BBL CFM Rating 
This spec  has a Clc button, which means you can calculate it from either: 
-Throttle bore sizes, # throttle bores, restrictor plate specs. 
-Flow bench data. 
See Section 2.9.7 on these options. 
Secondary Throttles 
This Yes or No combo box identifies if the carburetor has additional air flow capability at high air flow demands.  Select Yes or No as follows: 
No If there are no secondary throttles, pick No. 
No If there are secondary throttle plates, check to see if they are mechanical secondaries. With the  
engine not running, see if all throttle plates are completely open with the throttle linkage in the  
WOT (Wide Open Throttle) position.  If so, pick No.   
Yes If there are throttle openings which are not completely open, but which open "on demand" 
when engine air flow requirements increase, pick Yes. 
This spec can affect power due to increased carburetor restriction until the secondaries open, but improve power at lower RPM due to improved A/F Mixture Quality.  This spec is disabled if you have specified a Fuel Injected Manifold Type. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.5 Exhaust System Specs 
The Exhaust System specs affect exhaust system tuning and flow losses due to restrictions in the exhaust manifold or header and exhaust/muffler system. 

Header Specs (x runner/cyl): 
The "x runner/cyl" depends on the current value of # Ports specified by Exhaust Port Layout in the Head(s) menu.  If x=2, then the Header Specs of Inside Diameter and Total Length describe only 1 of the 2 exhaust header or manifold runners for each cylinder. 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs Below and enter in most any combination of  Header Specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Header Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  The program will then display the name of the Example Header specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how the Header section of this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue  (or hidden if you are in Beginner User mode).   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
Design 
This combo box lets you pick the general design of the exhaust header: 
* 
Tube headers, where each cylinder’s exhaust port connect to fairly smooth tube headers, which smoothly merge with other cylinders in a collector. 

* 
Log Manifold, where each exhaust port dumps into a common manifold with very short runners, usually less than 1” long. 

* 
Streamlined Manifold, where each exhaust port dumps into a common manifold, but the  runners are designed to smoothly route the exhaust away, and try to prevent exhaust from 1 cylinder traveling up the port to another  cylinder. 

* 
Zoomies are just like tube headers, except there is no collector, each cylinder empties into an individual pipe which does not connect to another cylinder. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Primary Diameter, in 
Is the average inside diameter of the header primary. If you know your header tubing outer diameter, simply subtract .1 inches to obtain the approximate inside diameter  For example:
 1 7/8" Headers: Tubing O.D. = 1.875 
Inside Diameter = 1.875 - .1 = 1.775 
Note: The exhaust runner dimensions are not as critical as the intake runner dimensions.  It is generally “overkill” to “cc" the primary header pipes.  Simply estimating the inside diameter by subtracting .1 from the tubing OD is adequate. 
Primary Length, in 
Is the length of the exhaust runner from the exhaust port in the head (not including the exhaust port) to the first "abrupt enlargement" of the runner downstream of the exhaust port.  The "abrupt enlargement" can be several different things: 
• 
The header collector where individual tubes merge together. 

• 
The end which is open to atmosphere on individual runner exhaust headers.  


Production headers for performance engines generally have runners in the 12-24 inch range.  Aftermarket headers generally have a length of 20-40 inches. 
Flow Efficiency 
Is similar to the Runner Flow Efficiency discussed in the Intake System section.  Runner Flow Efficiency affects flow restriction and exhaust tuning. 
See Section 2.9.6 for how to calculate Runner Flow Efficiency.  Even if you do not have flow bench data, review Section 2.9.6 for an understanding of how the Valve and Runner Flow Efficiencies relate to each other.  If you do not have flow data, use Table 2.7 to estimate the Runner Flow Efficiency for typical exhaust manifolds and headers. 
Table 2.7, Estimate Exhaust Runner Flow Efficiency 
Description  Flow Efficiency %  
Aftermarket, “street” headers (typically more bends to clear frame, provide for easy installation, etc.)  65 - 90%  
Aftermarket, “race” headers (designed primarily for low restriction, good tuning characteristics)  75 - 95%  

Collector Length 
Is the length of the collector on the Tube Headers from the end of the primary pipes at the beginning of the collector to the end of the collector where it opens to atmosphere or dumps into a muffler.  If you have selected a Design other than Tube Headers, this spec is disabled and not used in the calculations. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Exhaust System 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can specify Open Headers or No Exhaust System 

• 
You can select the Use Restriction Spec Below and enter in most any Exhaust System CFM Rating. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Exhaust System Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Exhaust System specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how the Exhaust System section of this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue  (or hidden if you are in Beginner User mode).   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
CFM Rating 
Is the "vehicle exhaust system and muffler restriction rating" and describes the design of the exhaust system.  It is very similar to a carb or throttle body Total CFM Rating in the Intake System Specs menu.   
The CFM Rating is measured in CFM (Cubic Feet per Minute) maintaining a 1.5" Hg (inches of mercury, or 20.4 inches of water) pressure drop across the entire exhaust system.  Exhaust system flow data is becoming  more common in magazine articles and performance "how to" books.  However, the pressure drop used for doing the flow tests may not be 20.4".  If not, use the following formula to obtain CFM flows corrected to 20.4": 
Also, if they flow each side of the exhaust system separately, simply add the two CFM values obtained. 
CFM @ 20.4” =  CFM @ XX” ×
      20.4                                                         XX Where XX is the actual test pressure in inches of water 
     For example, a magazine article says the right side of a particular exhaust system flows 270 CFM at 28" water. 
            First, convert 270 CFM @ 28" to CFM at 20.4" 
                CFM @ 20.4" = 270 *  
 = 270 * .854 = 230 CFM
 28      Second, add left and right side flows together to obtain total exhaust system flow (assuming the      left flows equal to the right) 
                Total flow = Lt flow + Rt flow = 230 + 230 = 460 CFM 
If you do not have flow data, use Table 2.8 to estimate the CFM Rating or click on the Clc button to calculate CFM as explained in Section 2.9.8.      
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
As a double check, this is the range of Exhaust Back Pressures (Exh Pres) you should obtain when calculating performance for the various CFM Ratings described in Table 2.8:
 Quiet = 7 to 12 PSI at the RPM for peak HP Sporty = 2 to 8 PSI at the RPM for peak HP Race = .5 to 3 PSI at the RPM for peak HP Open Headers = 0 PSI 
If you have the exhaust system mounted on the engine you are simulating with the Engine Analyzer, you can verify the CFM Rating by actually measuring the exhaust pressure in PSI.  Weld a hose fitting to the exhaust pipe as close as practical to the header or manifold.  Attach a hose from the fitting to a TEMPORARY pressure gauge OUTSIDE the vehicle. For example, tie it to a windshield wiper so it can be read inside the car.  The gauge should be for reading low pressures, like 5 PSI full scale for accurate measurements.  Make a full power acceleration in the vehicle and see if the measured pressure matches the Pro's Exh Pres. 
SAFETY NOTE:  Do not run an exhaust pressure line into the car.  This is to prevent carbon monoxide poisoning. 
Table 2.8, Estimate CFM Rating 
Designed Engine Power in Horsepower  CFM Rating  
Quiet  Sporty  Race  
0 - 50 51 - 100 101 - 150 151 - 200 201 - 250 251 - 300 301 - 400 401 - 600 601 - 1000 1000- 2000  20 60 100 140 180 220 280 400 640 1200  40 120 200 280 360 440 560 800 1280 2400  120 360 600 840 1080 1320 1680 2400 3840 7200 

   Definitions for Table 2.8: 
• 
Quiet is a production exhaust system for a family sedan or luxury sedan where a "throaty" engine roar is undesirable. 

• 
Sporty is a production exhaust system for performance/sports cars.  

• 
Race is an exhaust system with extremely low back pressure, designed for classes of racing where rules require mufflers. 

• 
For open headers/no exhaust system, enter a very large value of CFM, for example 100000 CFM. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.6 Cam/Valve Train 
The Cam/Valve Train specs describe the opening and closing of the valves, cam profile shape and valve train design. 
See Appendixes 5 and 6 for MANY new features added in v3.2 and v3.4, and which can be added with Plus version. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Cam and valve train specifications are critical to engine performance; therefore reliable information is necessary.  It is recommended that you use specifications given by the cam grinder or engine manufacturer.  Actual measurements of cam specifications can be done, however this can be tricky and therefore is recommended to have someone experienced perform them.  Guides for making these measurements are also available from cam grinders and manufacturers of valve train components and are beyond the scope of this 
User's Manual.
Figure 2.13 Engine Analyzer Cam Profile Definitions 

* Lash at Tappet is Lash at Valve divided by Rocker Arm Ratio.  Lash at Tappet is shown only to illustrate lash in general.  Lash at Tappet is not used in program or engine builders because it is difficult to measure. 
Important: The Cam/Valve Train menu updates all specs as you change other specs. For example, if you change a centerline, the Total Cam Advance number changes to reflect the new centerline. 
General Cam Specs 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs in this Menu and enter in most any combination of Cam or Valve Train specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Cam Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Cam specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue  (or hidden if you are in Beginner User mode).   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Lift for Rating Events 
You can pick the lift from base circle at which cam events are rated from the following: 
• 
.050" which was the method used by all our previous Engine Analyzers, and is the way used by most cam grinders for American aftermarket and racing cams. 

• 
.040" or 1mm which is a common metric method used for motorcycles and foreign cams. 

• 
Seat Timing which is commonly used for Advertised Duration by American cam grinders.   


Be sure you are using the correct one, as this will create large errors in the results if you are not. 
Total Cam Advance 
This combo box lets you either pick an advance, retard or “straight up” cam timing by clicking on the arrow key, or you can type in an advance or retard in degrees directly.  If you just enter a number, a number with a + sign (ex. +4) or a number followed by the letters “adv”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam advance.  If you just enter a number with a - sign (ex. -4) or a number followed by the letters “ret”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam retard. 
Total cam advance is based on the current Intake and Exhaust Centerlines.  If the centerlines are equal, Total Advance is set to 0 or straight up by the program.  This is a major change from DOS versions of Engine Analyzer where the spec Additional Cam Advance was used. In those versions you could specify opening and closing events which would produce a Total Cam Advance of say 4 degrees, but the Additional Cam Advance could be set to 0.  This was confusing to users.  This new method of using Total Cam Advance should match cam specs used by most cam grinders. 
To change cam timing from how it was ground by the cam grinder you will need special set of timing gears or an offset timing pin, key or bushing. In general, advancing the cam will give more lower end torque while giving up some top end HP; and retarding will give up low end torque to gain top end HP. 
Lifter (profile) Type 
This combo box lets you pick the type of lifter and the “steepness” or “aggressiveness” of the cam’s profiles.  The combinations consist of: 
   Hyd vs Solid Hydraulic vs Solid lash adjustment
   Flat vs Roller Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile (Roller being more aggressive) 
   Mild vs Agr Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile  (Agr being more aggressive) 
   Invrtd The most aggressive or steep profile  (being more aggressive than Mild or Agr) 
The choice of Hydraulic vs Solid is the most important as this dictates the use of a lash setting and whether hydraulic lifter pump up is possible.  The other choices simply determine differences in the steepness of the profile for the same Max Lobe Lift.. Most truly aggressive cams or roller cams have more Max Lobe Lift for a given duration, and milder or hydraulic cams have less Max Lobe Lift. 
Valve Train 
This combo box lets you pick a general description of the Valve Train.  This gives the program some idea of the spring loads and design which can effect engine friction, and the weights, stiffness and spring rates which effect when the valve train will go into Valve Toss for mechanical lifters or Lifter Pump Up for hydraulic lifters.   
These problems also depends strongly on the steepness of the cam profile, the amount of valve lift (Lobe Lift x Rocker Arm Ratio) for the amount of duration..  High  lift with low duration indicates a very steep or aggressive profile.  The outputs of Valve Toss and Lifter Pump Up are displayed in the output to let you see when problems occur. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Intake 
Centerline, deg ATDC 
Is the location of the maximum lift point on the cam profile.  If you are using the program’s standard cam profiles, this is also exactly half way between the open and closing point because the program assumes the same opening and closing profile. 
Duration @ xxx 
Is the number of crank degrees where the tappet is lifted to the tappet lift specified as the Lift for Rating Events in the General Cam Specs section above base circle. 
Opening @ xxx 
Identifies crankshaft degrees before top dead center where the tappet has been lifted to the Rated Tappet Lift above base circle Base Circle on the opening ramp. (Rated Tappet Lift  is specified in the General Cam Specs section.) This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs.  If this event occurs after top dead center, enter a negative value.  For example, if it is reported as 4 degrees after top dead center, enter -4. 
This spec is not displayed if you have checked the Preference “Don’t Show Valve Open/Close Events”.  See Pages 13-14. 
Closing @ xxx 
Identifies crankshaft degrees before top dead center where the tappet has been lowered to the Rated Tappet Lift above base circle Base Circle on the closing ramp. (Rated Tappet Lift  is specified in the General Cam Specs section.) This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs. It is highly unlikely, but if this event occurs before bottom dead center, enter a negative value.  For example, if it is reported as 4 degrees before bottom dead center, enter -4. 
This spec is not displayed if you have checked the Preference “Don’t Show Valve Open/Close Events”.  See Pages 13-14. 
Max Lobe Lift, in 
Identifies how high the cam lobe lifts the tappet above Base Circle in inches.  If you are given "gross valve lift" by the cam grinder, divide by the rocker arm ratio assumed by the cam grinder to obtain gross or maximum tappet lift.  This can also be done by clicking on the Clc button to open up a Calculation Menu.  See Section 2.9.9. 
Lash @ Valve, in 
Identifies the lash or clearance in inches between the valve tip and its actuator, generally the rocker arm.  If you have specified a hydraulic Lifter (profile) Type, this spec is disabled. 
Notes: The Engine Analyzer assumes the lash you enter here is the lash the cam was designed for.  You need the Pro version to set a lash different than what the cam was designed for. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Rocker Arm Ratio 
Identifies the ratio between tappet lift and valve lift.  Generally rocker arm ratios vary between 1.3 to 2.0.  For valve trains with no rocker arms, for example overhead cam systems with directing acting tappets, enter 1.  See Figure 2.14.  The Pro assumes the ratio is constant although actual rocker arm ratios vary slightly with valve lift. 

deg ATDC Duration @ .050”    Max Lobe Lift, in Actual Lash @ Valve, in Rocker Arm Ratio 
Definitions for these specs are the same as for the Intake cam described previously. 
Calculated Cam Specs 
Lobe Separation, cam deg 
Is the separation between the intake and exhaust centerlines in cam (not crankshaft) degrees, and is the standard method used by most cam grinders.  This number is calculated from other specs in this menu and can not be entered directly. 
Gross Intake Valve Lift, in 
Is the maximum lift of the valve with NO valve lash (even if it is a mechanical cam with valve lash).  Mathematically it is Max Lobe Lift multiplied by rocker arm ratio.  This is the standard way most cam grinders rate their cams for valve lift, sometimes called Advertised Lift. This number is calculated from other specs in this menu and can not be entered directly. 
Note:  If you are not using (specifying in the program) the same Rocker Arm Ratios as what the cam grinder is assuming, this number will not match the cam grinder’s catalog or advertised lift. 
Gross Exhaust Valve Lift, in 
See Gross Intake Valve Lift above. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.7 Supercharger 
See Appendixes 5, 6, and 7 for new features added in v3.2, v3.4 A, and 3.4 B. 
The Supercharger specs describe the turbocharger or supercharger installed, if any. 

Design 
Type 
This combo tells the program if any supercharger is installed, and if so, what type. 
• 
No Supercharger 

• 
Turbocharger 

• 
Roots Supercharger 

• 
Centrifugal Supercharger 


Depending on your choice, various sections of this menu will be enabled or disabled (hidden or shown in Beginner User mode). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Turbocharger 
Select Turbocharger from the Design Type combo box in the upper left corner if the engine is equipped with a turbocharger which most engine builders are familiar with.  A turbocharger is basically a centrifugal compressor tied to a turbine which is driven by engine exhaust gases.  This will enable or display the Turbocharger Specs section of this menu. 
Turbocharger Specs 
These specs describe the size and efficiency of the turbocharger's compressor and exhaust driven turbine. 
The size and performance of the turbocharger's compressor can be obtained from a compressor "map", which are available from the manufacturer.  A typical compressor map is shown in Figure 2.28.  The "island" is the area which gives the maximum efficiency, and is where you want your turbo compressor to operate.  The Engine Analyzer will need information about the point where the peak efficiency occurs. 
The turbocharger compressor and turbine sizes determine how soon or at what RPM the turbo will start developing boost.  Compressor and turbine sizes are primarily dictated by Island CFM and Turbine Nozzle size respectively.  A small turbo system will develop boost at a lower RPM, but will become restrictive at higher RPM and higher air flows.  Therefore, small turbos are better choices for street use. Larger turbos are better suited to race engines where RPM is continually high, and flow restrictions must be kept to a minimum. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this section: 
• 
You can select a general type of turbocharger and the program will estimate the specs.  This is useful when you can not find an Example close to your turbo and you do not know your turbo’s specs. 

• 
You can select the Use Specs Below and enter in most any combination of  Turbo Specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Turbo Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Turbo specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how the Turbo section of this menu looks.  If you choose one of the Typical turbos, all Turbo specs will be disabled (printed in gray) and you can not change them.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue.  In Beginner User mode, disabled specs or specs printed in blue are hidden. 
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
Peak Efficiency, % 
Is the highest thermal efficiency on the compressor map in percent.  The highest efficiency will occur in the center of the island.  Typical values range from 65 to 80%.  This combo box lets you pick a general rating.  If you do not have a compressor map, pick 70% or pick an Example Turbocharger. 
CFM at Peak Efficiency 
Is the CFM where peak efficiency occurs.  CFM is usually the horizontal "X" scale of a compressor map. 
If you do not have a compressor map, estimate Island CFM from your engine's displacement and application as in Table 2.9 or pick one from the Turbocharger Library. 
Table 2.9 Estimate Peak Efficiency CFM 
Engine CID  Application  CFM at Peak Efficiency  Number of Turbos  
less than 50  Street  60  1  
less than 50  Race  100  1  
50 - 100  Street  150  1  
50 - 100  Race  225  1  
100 - 150  Street  200  1  
100 - 150  Race  300  1  
150 - 250  Street  250  1  
150 - 250  Race  400  1  
250 - 400  Street  450  1  
250 - 400  Race  350  2  
400 - 600  Street  350  2  
400 - 600  Race  500  2  

Pres Ratio at Pk Effcy 
Is the pressure ratio (PR) where peak efficiency occurs.  PR is usually the vertical "Y" scale of a compressor map and is usually in the range from 1.5 to 2.5.  If you do not have a compressor map, use a PR of 1.8 or pick one from the Turbocharger Examples. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Turbine Nozzle 
This combo box lets you pick a general description of the exhaust turbine's minimum flow area or nozzle.  This spec determines when the compressor will start to produce boost, the smaller the nozzle, and the earlier (lower the RPM) the boost comes on. 
Safety Note:  Although the Engine Analyzer can do a very realistic job of estimating turbocharger performance, DO NOT rely on it alone to safely choose the optimum turbocharger size for a specific engine.  Turbochargers can overspeed (potentially explode from overrevving) or create excessive exhaust temperatures and pressures if sized incorrectly.  Use the Engine Analyzer only for estimating potential performance gains with various approximate turbocharger sizes.  You must follow the turbo manufacturer's recommendations for safe turbo combinations for your application. 
Wastegate Limit, PSI 
If turbocharger conditions are such that it delivers boost greater than this specified level, the Engine Analyzer assumes an exhaust bypass valve or wastegate is activated to limit boost.  Wastegates divert exhaust gasses around the turbocharger’s turbine.  This is a very common way to control boost, especially for street applications.  Therefore, set Wastegate Limit to the pressure the wastegate is designed to control boost to. 
Intercooler Eff, % 
This combo box lets you pick the effectiveness of the intercooler to cool the intake charge.  An intercooler looks much like a radiator, but instead of cooling engine coolant, it cools the intake air charge.  A turbocharger heats up the intake air considerably through the process of compression. Cool air is more dense than warm air.  More cool air can be packed into a given cylinder volume, producing more power.  The intercooler allows ambient air (non-compressed, surrounding air) to cool the charge.  If the intercooler is 100% effective, the intake charge would be brought down to its original (ambient) temperature as specified by Air Temp in the Weather Conditions in the Running Conditions menu with no change in boost pressure.  See Table 2.10 for definitions of the various ratings. 
Note:  If the compressed air’s temperature has increaded more than 300 degrees above ambient, the intercooler’s effectiveness drops.  This is to more realistically simulate real intercoolers. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Table 2.10 Descriptions of Intercooler Effectiveness 
Intercooler System  Description  
0% No Intercooler  No cooling of the intake charge takes place, that no intercooler is installed.  
25% Steady Runng Air-to-Air  The intake charge is brought back 25 % to its original temperature. This level simulates a typical air-to-air intercooler which has been running continually at full boost for over 30 seconds or more. An intercooler's effectiveness tends to drop under sustained full boost operation as the intercooler tends to heat up.  
50% Quick Accel Air­to-Air  The intake charge is brought back 50 % to its original temperature. This level simulates a typical air-to-air intercooler for a short “burst” to full boost from a light load condition.  The intercooler will not be as hot and can cool the incoming air better until the intercooler heats up.  
75% Air-to-Water  The intake charge is brought back 75 % to its original temperature.  This level simulates a special intercooler which has a volume of  water around the fins. This intercooler is more effective because the water probably starts cooler than an air-to-air intercooler and the water takes longer to heat up (has more “thermal inertia”) than just an air cooled intercooler by itself.  
100% Air-to-Cold Water  The intake charge is brought back completely (100%) to its original temperature. This level simulates a special intercooler which has a volume of cool water around the fins. This intercooler is more effective because the water starts much cooler than an air-to-air intercooler and the water takes longer to heat up than just an air cooled intercooler by itself.  
125% Air-to-Ice Water  The intake charge is cooled to even colder than its original temperature. This level simulates a special intercooler which has a volume of cold water and ice around the fins. This intercooler is more effective because the water probably starts much colder than the surrounding air and takes very long to heat up.  
Other  Other types of intercoolers are possible which use freon, or water or alcohol sprays, or cooling fans to keep the intercooler very cold.  You will have to estimate how well these work and select from one of the 5 choices available.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Roots Supercharger Specs 
Select Roots Supercharger from the Design Type combo box in the upper left corner if the engine is equipped with a belt driven, positive displacement "Roots" supercharger, like those produced by B&M (tm), Weiand (tm) or the "original" GMC 6-71.  A "Roots" compressor looks more like a typical engine oil pump, where a volume of gas is trapped and then forced into the intake manifold.  The advantage of an ideal "Roots" supercharger is that a relatively constant boost level can be maintained from low RPM to high RPM.   
 However, the disadvantages of the "Roots" supercharger include: 
• 
Higher internal friction due to large seals rubbing on surfaces 

• 
Internal leakage reduces boost at lower RPM 

• 
Lower thermal efficiency than a centrifugal supercharger 


Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs in this Menu and enter in most any combination of Roots Supercharger specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Roots Supercharger, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Roots Supercharger specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue  (or hidden if you are in Beginner User mode).   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
Design 
This combo box lets you pick a general description of the Roots supercharger.  This description determines the amount of leakage around the seals.  More leakage spins easier (has less rubbing friction) but does not build as much boost, especially at low RPM. If you pick one of the “screw” types, the program also assumes a higher thermal efficiency.  Whipple (tm) and PSI (tm) are brand names of screw type Roots superchargers. 
Volume/Revolution, cu in 
A "Roots" blower develops boost when the mass of air it pumps to the engine is greater than the mass of air the engine could accept at zero boost. In order for the engine to accept this mass of air it must be compressed, so a given mass of air occupies less volume.  Therefore, a "Roots" supercharger boost level is directly related to the mass of air it can pump.  This mass of air depends on supercharger RPM (engine RPM and belt ratio) and supercharger swept volume per revolution.  The Volume/Revolution spec is critical and is generally available from the supercharger manufacturer.  The Volume/Revolution for GMC blowers can be calculated from the following equations: 
   For Small Diameter (5.5") Rotors  Volume/Revolution, cu in = rotor length, inches  x  22.64 
   For Large Diameter  (5.8") Rotors  Volume/Revolution, cu in = rotor length, inches  x  27.45 
   For example, for a 6-71     with 5.8" diameter by   15" long rotors:  Volume/Revolution, cu in = 15" x 27.45 = 412  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Belt Ratio 
Is the ratio between the drive pulley mounted on the engine crankshaft and the driven pulley on the Roots supercharger.  This ratio identifies the amount of difference between engine RPM and supercharger RPM.  Belt Ratio can be calculated by the equation below or by clicking on the Clc button as shown in Section 2.9.10. 
        Belt Ratio =Crank Pulley Diameter, inches                             S/C Pulley Diameter, inches 
Many people talk about the % overdrive or underdrive of a supercharger.  The equation to convert Belt Ratio to % overdrive is: 
% Overdrive = (Belt Ratio - 1) x 100% 
For example, if the Belt Ratio is 1.5, the % Overdrive would be (1.5-1) x 100% or  50% Overdrive.  If the Belt Ratio is .8 the % Overdrive would be (.8-1) x 100% or -20% Overdrive or 20% Underdrive. 
   Safety Note:  You must follow the supercharger manufacturer's recommendations    for maximum belt ratios, maximum engine RPM and maximum supercharger RPM. 
Check Appendix 7 for new Modern Supercharger designs you can pick from. 
Centrifugal Supercharger 
 Select Centrifugal Supercharger from the Design Type combo box in the upper left corner if the engine is equipped with a belt driven, centrifugal supercharger like a Paxton (tm) or Vortech (tm).  A centrifugal blower or compressor looks much like a typical engine water pump.  The impeller must be driven at very high speeds to create significant boost.  Usually, there is a "speed increasing drive system" internal to the centrifugal compressor so the impeller is spinning much faster than its external drive pulley. 
In general terms, the boost of a centrifugal superchargers is directly related to the square of the RPM.  This means that if it will produce 3 PSI boost at 3000 RPM, it will produce 4 times that boost at twice that RPM (12 PSI at 6000 RPM).  Therefore, centrifugal supercharges can be quite "peaky", producing high boost over a narrow RPM range.  In addition,  since high boost conditions at low speeds are unlikely, engines with centrifugal compressors are less prone to detonation (spark knock). 
Centrifugal Specs 
Centrifugal superchargers are basically "belt driven" turbochargers.  A centrifugal compressor looks like, performs like, and is tested much like a turbocharger compressor.  The performance of a centrifugal compressor is also documented in a "map" like that shown in Figure 2.28. Therefore we will characterize the centrifugal supercharger with specs much like the ones we use for a turbocharger.   
Centrifugal supercharger specs like those in this section are difficult for the average person to obtain.  The supercharger manufacturer may supply maps on request.  However, if you do not have specs, we recommend you use the specs which come preloaded in the Centrifugal Supercharger Library for common superchargers. 
This section refers to many items discussed in detail in the previous Turbocharger section.  You may want to glance at it first before you read this section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Type 
This combo lets you describe the source of the specs used in this section: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs Below and enter in most any combination of  Supercharger Specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example to be presented with a list of Example Supercharger Specs, much the same as clicking on the Get Example button.  It will then display the name of the Example Supercharger specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how the Centrifugal Supercharger section of this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue.  In Beginner User mode, disabled specs or specs printed in blue are hidden.   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
Peak Efficiency, % 
Is the highest thermal efficiency on the compressor map in percent.  The highest efficiency will occur in the center of the island.  Typical values range from 55 to 75%.  This combo box lets you pick a general rating.  If you do not have a compressor map, pick 60% or pick an Example Centrifugal Supercharger. 
CFM at Peak Efficiency 
Is the CFM where peak efficiency occurs.  CFM is usually the horizontal "X" scale of a compressor map.  The older, original Paxton had a CFM at Peak Effy of only 320 CFM.  Newer Paxtons, Vortechs and PowerDynes have CFM ratings in the 500 to 1000 CFM range. If you do not have a compressor map, we strongly recommend you pick one of the Examples Centrifugal Superchargers. 
Pres Ratio at Pk Effy 
Is the pressure ratio (PR) where peak efficiency occurs just like for turbochargers.  PR is usually the vertical "Y" scale and in the range from 1.25 to 2.0 with the old, original Paxton (tm) being approximately 1.35 and newer Paxtons and Vortechs being from 1.5 to 
1.8. If you do not have a compressor map, we strongly recommend you pick one of the Examples Centrifugal Superchargers. 
Pulley RPM at Pk Effy 
Is the pulley RPM (not internal impeller RPM) where peak efficiency occurs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Max Safe Pulley RPM 
This is the manufacturer’s safety limit on pulley RPM.  The program checks to ensure the belt ratio and engine RPM combination stays below this RPM, or you are given a warning in the Notes section of the Test results.  Also, boost and power are purposely reduced significantly to flag out this overspeed problem. 
Safety Note:  You must follow the supercharger manufacturer's recommendations for maximum belt ratios, maximum engine RPM and maximum supercharger RPM. 
Belt Ratio 
Is the ratio between the drive pulley mounted on the engine crankshaft and the driven pulley on the Centrifugal supercharger.  This ratio identifies the amount of speed increase between engine RPM and supercharger RPM.  Belt Ratio can be calculated by the equation below or by clicking on the Clc button as shown in Section 2.9.20. 
        Belt Ratio =Crank Pulley Diameter, inches                             S/C Pulley Diameter, inches 
Many people talk about the % overdrive or underdrive of a supercharger.  The equation to convert Ratio to % overdrive is: 
% Overdrive = (Belt Ratio - 1) x 100% 
For example, if the Belt Ratio is 1.5, the % Overdrive would be (1.5-1) x 100% or  50% Overdrive.  If the Belt Ratio is .8 the % Overdrive would be (.8-1) x 100% or -20% Overdrive or 20% Underdrive. 
Safety Note:  You must follow the supercharger manufacturer's recommendations for maximum belt ratios, maximum engine RPM and maximum supercharger RPM. 
Intercooler Eff, % 
This combo box lets you pick the effectiveness of the intercooler to cool the intake charge.  An intercooler looks much like a radiator, but instead of cooling engine coolant, it cools the intake air charge.  A turbocharger heats up the intake air considerably through the process of compression. Cool air is more dense than warm air.  More cool air can be packed into a given cylinder volume, producing more power.  The intercooler allows ambient air (non-compressed, surrounding air) to cool the charge.  If the intercooler is 100% effective, the intake charge would be brought down to its original (ambient) temperature as specified by Air Temp in the Weather Conditions in the Running Conditions menu with no change in boost pressure.  See Table 2.10 in the Turbocharger section for definitions of the various ratings. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.8 Calculate Performance 
2.8.1 Running Conditions 
You can run a test (calculate performance) by: 
• 
Clicking on the Calc HP button at the top of the Main Screen 

• 
Clicking on Calc HP(F2) menu item or press the <F2> key at the Main Screen 

• 
Clicking on Running Conditions to open up the Running Conditions menu, then click on the Calculate Performance button in this menu.  The Running Conditions menu will present a menu of conditions and options which describe how you will run or test this engine.  These conditions include: 

• 
Weather conditions  

• 
Level of nitrous oxide and type of fuel 

• 
RPMs to run and options for the calculations 


Check Appendix 6 for new features for this menu available in v3.4, standard and Plus versions. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Test Conditions 
Weather 
This combo box lets you pick whether you want the test results corrected to standard dyno conditions, or to the weather conditions listed in this section.  Standard conditions consist of: 
• 
Standard Dyno 29.92” Barometer, 60 degrees F, dry air (0 deg dew point) used for most racing dynos and quoted by most racing magazines. 

• 
SAE conditions 29.6” Barometer, 77 degrees F, normal humidity (49 deg dew point) used for rating new car engines by automakers since about 1985.  This rating gives about 2% less power than the Standard Dyno conditions 


If you choose standard conditions, the weather conditions in this menu are disabled, as they have no effect on the calculated performance. 
Baro. Pres., “Hg 
Is the barometric pressure in inches of mercury of the nearest weather station; or at the track or dynamometer room if a barometer instrument is available at these locations.   
If this pressure is in:  Multiply by:  
PSI  2.036  
Bar  29.52  
mm Hg   .03937  
To obtain '' Hg. For example: 14 PSI  is 14 x 2.036 or 28.5” Hg.  

Click on the Clc button to review notes concerning the relationship of Barometric Pressure and Elevation.  Also see Elevation, ft and Section 2.9.11. 
Intake Air Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the intake air as it enters the carburetor or throttle body measured in degrees Fahrenheit.  To match dynamometer performance, enter dynamometer room air temperature.  To simulate vehicle performance, enter the temperature of the air entering the air cleaner.  Underhood temperatures can be HOT on warm days (150 degrees or more).  If a hood scoop or some other type of cool air induction is provided, outside (ambient) air temperature is closer to the actual intake air temperature. 
If this temperature is in:        First Multiply by:       Then Add: Degrees R 1 - 460 Degrees C 1.8 32 Degrees K 1.8 - 460 To obtain degrees F.  For example 30 deg C = 30 x 1.8 + 32 =  86 degrees F. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Dew Point, Deg F 
The dew point in degrees F of the air at the track or dyno room, which describes the air's humidity level.  The Dew Point must be less than Intake Air Temp, deg F.  Dew Point can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from relative humidity and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.9.12. 
Dew Point is a less confusing way of describing the air's moisture level than relative humidity.  Relative humidity readings are only meaningful if you also know the air temperature when the reading was made.  However, the air's dew point remains constant even when the air temperature changes.  For example, 40 degree air with a 80 % relative humidity has only a 10% relative humidity when the air is heated to 100 degrees.  However, the dew point remains at 36 degrees for both air temperatures. 
Elevation, ft 
Is the elevation of the race track or dynamometer room above sea level measured in feet.  This value should be available from the local weather station and is used to correct the Barometric Pressure, “Hg specification.  Barometric pressure drops as you go up in elevation. There are two different ways of entering this specification, depending on how the Barometric Pressure measurement was made: 
Barometric Pressure obtained from radio station, TV station or weather service:  “Official sources” usually correct their 
barometric pressure readings to sea level, meaning their reading is the barometric pressure you would get if you (or your 
engine) could be at sea level or 0 elevation.  If you have a Barometric Pressure corrected to sea level, you must enter 
the engine's actual elevation above sea level in feet. 
Barometric Pressure obtained directly from a barometer instrument at the track or dynamometer room.  This reading will 
usually not be corrected to sea level, but will be the "observed" or actual barometric pressure reading at the same 
elevation as the engine. For observed or uncorrected Barometric Pressure, enter an elevation of 0. 
Click on the Clc button to review notes concerning the relationship of Barometric Pressure and Elevation.  Also see Barometric Pressure in this section and Section 2.9.11. 
Coolant Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the coolant as it leaves the engine in degrees Fahrenheit.  This value can be estimated as the "start to open" temperature rating of the thermostat.  If the engine is air cooled, enter a value of 190 degrees. 
Nitrous Oxide 
System Type 
Click on the System Type combo box to pick the type of nitrous system, either None, Single Stage or Dual Stage.   
The Nitrous Oxide specs in this section describe the amount of nitrous oxide a system can deliver.  Most nitrous systems are rated for the HP increase they can deliver in a properly tuned engine.  The Engine Analyzer makes 3 major simplifying assumptions concerning nitrous oxide injection: 
• 
Jet sizes are proper for correct A/F, and good nitrous and fuel distribution 

• 
Nitrous is injected as a liquid and only a portion vaporizes on the way to the cylinder.  There is little displacement of the air which would normally enter the engine under "non-nitrous" conditions. 

• 
Nitrous increases the burn rate, reducing the required spark advance. 


You can not use the Engine Analyzer to design nitrous systems, but only to estimate performance improvements.  Select the type which describes the system you are using.  Various portions of the Nitrous Oxide Specs menu become enabled and disabled depending on your choice here. If you select None, all Nitrous Oxide specs are disabled (set to gray and you are not able to change them) because they have no effect on the calculations. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
1st Stage HP Rating 
Manufacturer's HP rating of the 1st stage of the nitrous oxide system.  If you are using a 1 stage system, this is the full HP rating of this type of system. 
1st Stage Starting RPM 
RPM where injection from the 1st stage starts. 
2nd Stage Added HP 
Manufacturer's HP rating of the nitrous oxide added by the 2nd stage.  Total nitrous HP is then 1st Stage HP + 2nd Stage HP.   
2nd Stage Starting RPM 
RPM where injection from the 2nd stage starts. 
Fuel Specs: 
Fuel Type 
Specifies the type of fuel being burned, either street gasoline, alcohol (methanol) or “Very Rich Alcohol.  The Engine Analyzer makes the  following assumptions about the difference between these fuels. 
• 
Alcohol is run at 5.0 A/F versus 12.5 for gas. 

• 
Alcohol is 13% more dense than gas. 

• 
Alcohol almost always produces 8-12% more power  than gas 

• 
Alcohol at 5.0 has the same burn rate as gas at 12.5 and therefore requires the same spark advance.  (In actual practice, there is conflicting data concerning alcohol's burn rate or required spark advance.  It appears very dependent of A/F mixture quality, A/F distribution, and other factors difficult to simulate.  Therefore, this assumption is made.) 


The differences between Alcohol and Very Rich Alcohol include: 
• 
Very Rich Alcohol produces less power 

• 
Very Rich Alcohol runs 67% richer or A/F of 3:1 

• 
Very Rich Alcohol nearly completely eliminates any detonation. 


Obviously many more considerations must be made when building an alcohol engine than what are considered in the Engine Analyzer.  Generally, alcohol has a fuel octane (R+M)/2 of 100 but its cooling effects shows less detonation potential than 100 octane gasoline. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Fuel Octane (R+M)/2 
Is the octane # rating of the gasoline as reported on a service station gas pump.  There are two methods fuel suppliers use to rate the octane number, one is the Research method, the other is the Motor method.  Generally, the Motor method will give an octane rating approximately 4-12 octane #s lower than the Research method.  The octane rating given at the gas pump is the average of the Research and the Motor ratings.  In fact, gas pumps will often display the formula "(R+M)/2" to say their octane rating is the Research octane # plus the Motor octane # divided by 2. 
To estimate Fuel Octane from the Research octane #, simply subtract 4.  To estimate Fuel Octane from the Motor octane #, simply add 
4. For example, if you know the Motor octane is 94, enter a Fuel Octane (R+M)/2 of 94 + 4 = 98 into the Engine Analyzer . 
The Engine Analyzer assumes that as octane increases, vapor pressure decreases.  Vapor pressure is a measure of how easily the gas evaporates or can be atomized.  What this means is that the higher the octane, the more likely you are to have poor A/F Mix Qal in the results, resulting in possibly significant power loss.  This means that for best performance, only use as much octane as you need to eliminate detonation by keeping Knock Index low. 
This spec is disabled if you choose one of the Alcohol fuesl and the program picks the octane. 
RPMs to Run 
Starting RPM 
See RPM Step Size below. 
Number of RPMs 
See RPM Increment below. 
RPM Increment 
These three RPM specifications tell the Engine Analyzer for how many and for which RPMs to calculate the results.  The effect of these specs are displayed in the RPM Preview box shown directly under these specs.  For example: 
Starting RPM  1000  
Number of RPM Steps  8  
RPM Increment  400  

This combination will have results calculated for the following RPMs:  
1000 1400 1800 2200 2600 3000 3400 3800 Due to space limitations, all RPMs can not be shown on the menu.  The RPM Preview will show this as: 
RPM Preview: 1000, 1400, 1800, ....3800 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
“Starting Point” Suggestions 
The Engine Analyzer can give suggestions for intake and exhaust runner dimensions and cam profiles based on several very simple tuning principles or rules of thumb. See Appendix 3 and Example 4.5.  These are good starting points, but you should fine tune these specs based on trial and error with the program’s calculations.   
For Peak HP at This RPM 
Enter the RPM where you want optimum intake and exhaust tuning, or RPM where you want HP to peak.  The Engine Analyzer will list potentially good runner lengths and diameters, and cam durations and lifts at the end of the calculated results.  This value has no affect on the torque and HP test results. 
For This Intake Runner Len 
Enter the length of the intake tract (port in the head and runner in the manifold) that you are “stuck with”.  The program will give an average diameter for the port in the head and manifold runner to produce good intake tuning at the RPM entered above.   
You can determine the Port Volume for this diameter by going to the Head(s) Specs menu and typing it in for Intake Port Avg Diameter and seeing what Port Volume is calculated.  For this Port Volume to be accurate, you must also have entered the correct Port Length in the Head(s) Specs menu first. 
Starting Point suggestions given in the Special Calculations section of the Test Results based on the specs above may NOT give best performance and MUST be refined through 'cut and try' running the program. Runner Dimensions are for Port PLUS Intake Manifold Runner or Exhaust Header Primary Pipe. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.2 Test Results from Calculated Performance 
The Engine Analyzer’s calculated output consists primarily of 3 types: 
• 
RPM Data. This is data which changes for each RPM tested, like torque, HP, fuel flow, etc. 

• 
Special Calculations.  This is data which does not change with RPM, like cubic inch displacement, dynamic compression ratio, etc. 

• 
Cycle Data. This is data which changes within one RPM, for each different crank angle of the engine.  In this version of Engine Analyzer, the only cycle data available is Valve Lift. 


Figure 2.18 Major Features of Output Screen Showing Test Results 
Menu bar with output options: Back to Main Menu, Make Graphs, Print Results, Display Help, View Special Calculations or the History Log, Analyze results (program gives advice based on current results),  File to write an ASCII file 
Command buttons: Make Graphs, Print Results, Display/Edit Engine, Display Notes (safety issues, possible problems, etc. about current test results) Summary of Notes (safety issues, possible problems, etc.) 
Name of current Engine File Performance Summary RPM Data. Click on any cell in the grid for a Help definition of that particular piece of data. 

Slide bar. Click and drag button to display all RPM test results. 
Special Calculations. Results which do not change with RPM. Click on any result for a Help definition of that particular 
Slide bar. Click and drag button to dis­play all Special Cal­culation test results. 
RPM Data and Special Calculations are shown in  Figure 2.35.  Cycle data of Valve Lift is only available for graphing.  Several other features are available from this screen (Figure 2.35) which are also discussed in this section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
RPM Data 
RPM Data looks much like a dynamometer data sheet which gives projected engine test results for each RPM tested. 
Engine RPM 
Is the engine crankshaft’s rotational speed in revolutions per minute. 
Brk Tq, ft-lbs 
Is the brake torque produced by the engine measured in ft. lbs.  Brake torque is the usable net torque at the engine's flywheel.  See Appendix 2.  This is the same as the torque numbers you see in advertisements and in dynamometer torque and HP curves. 
Brake HP 
Is the Brake HP produced by the engine measured in horsepower.  Brake HP is the usable net HP at the engine's flywheel.  See Appendix 2.  This is the same as the HP numbers you see in advertisements and in dynamometer torque and HP curves.  To calculate torque from HP or HP from torque, use the following formulas:
 Torque = HP x 5252 HP = Torque x RPM RPM 5252 
Exh Pres, PSI 
Is the average exhaust pressure after the exhaust port and exhaust manifold/header, but before the exhaust system (if any), measured in PSI.  (In earlier versions this was given in inches of mercury.)  
Int Vac, “Hg Boost, PSI 
Is the average intake vacuum or supercharger boost after the carburetor or throttle body (and supercharger/turbocharger if any) but before the intake manifold runners measured in "Hg during the intake stroke.  If the engine is supercharged or turbocharged, the units are given in PSI boost. 
Vol Eff% 
Is the volumetric efficiency of the engine measured in %.  The volumetric efficiency is the percent of air which actually enters and remains in the cylinder during each intake stroke, compared to the amount which could under perfect, unsupercharged conditions. The amount of air which can enter the cylinder under perfect conditions is the swept volume of the cylinder with air at the actual barometric pressure (Barometric Pressure and Elevation effects combined) and Intake Air Temp, deg F.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
For example, if the swept volume is 50 cu in, the air density at the specific barometer and intake air temperature is .000044 lb/cu in, .0022 lbs (50 cu in x .000044 lb/cu in) is the amount of air which can enter the cylinder under perfect conditions.  If only .0018 lbs actually enters the cylinder during the intake stroke, the volumetric efficiency is: 
Vol Eff% = .0018 x 100% = 82 % .0022 
During supercharging, if the engine ingests .0030 lbs each intake stroke, the volumetric efficiency is calculated as: 
Vol Eff% = .0030 x 100% = 136 % .0022 
If .0030 lbs enters the cylinder, but .0003 lbs goes straight through and ends up out the exhaust (called "short circuiting"), the Vol Eff% is: 
Vol Eff% = (.0030 - .0003) x 100% = 123 % .0022 
Actual CFM 
Is the flow rate of fresh air into the engine measured in cubic feet per minute (CFM).  This is measured at the entrance of the air cleaner or if no air cleaner is present, the carburetor(s) or throttle body(s).  Since this is called "actual", it is not corrected to standard conditions as in earlier Engine Analyzer programs.  Actual CFM should correlate more closely to actual dynamometer air flow measurements. 
Fuel Flow, lb/hr 
Is the fuel flow delivered by the carburetor(s) or fuel injectors in lbs/hr for either gas or alcohol.  If you are running Nitrous Oxide, this does include the fuel for the nitrous oxide system, even though this may come from a separate fuel delivery system. 
For Gasoline, the fuel is assumed to be similar to octane (an expensive type of gasoline with an octane # of 100) in density (5.86 lb/gal), heating value (19,000 BTU/lb), and stoichiometric A/F (14.7). Gasoline fuel flows are calculated based on an optimum power A/F (air/fuel ratio) of 12.5:1. 
If your particular engine runs at 11.5:1 A/F, your engine burns 12.5/11.5, or 1.09 times as much fuel per unit of air as the Engine Analyzer calculates. Multiply the Engine Analyzer’s fuel flow by 1.09 to get fuel flows for an engine running at 11.5:1.  To calculate fuel flows in gallons per hour (GPH), multiply lbs/hr by .171 (.171=1/5.86). 
        For example, the Engine Analyzer calculates 145 lbs/hr fuel flow at peak HP, assuming 12.5:1 A/F. 
            Your engine runs at 12:1, instead of 12.5:1 A/F:
 145 lbs/hr x 12.5 = 151 lbs/hr 12 
   You need the flow in GPH to size a fuel pump: 
151 lbs/hr x .171 = 25.8 GPH 
For Alcohol, the fuel is assumed to be methanol with a density of 6.6 lb/gal and heating value of 8,600 BTU/lb.  (For “Very Rich Alcohol” fuel type, the A/F is assumed to be 3:1.)  Fuel flows are calculated based on an A/F of 5.0:1.  To calculate fuel flows in gallons per hour (GPH), multiply lbs/hr of alcohol by .152 . 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
A/F Mix Qal, % 
Is the A/F Mixture Quality rated in %, where 100 % means there is no power loss from poor A/F Mixture Quality.  A/F Mixture Quality is the combined result of these separate effects: 
• 
A/F maldistribution where all cylinders do not get the same air and fuel.  Some cylinders run leaner than optimum and some run richer. 

• 
Fuel Metering where the fuel metering signal strength to the carb is less than required to atomize the fuel, or worse, not even pull fuel through the jets at all. 

• 
Atomization of fuel in the chamber, which depends on many design variables and fuel properties.  The Pro assumes that the higher the Octane rating of the fuel, the lower the Reid Vapor pressure and the less likely the fuel is to atomize.  Obviously not all fuels have the same vapor pressure for a certain octane, so this trend is not necessarily true for all fuels.  Alcohol is also assumed to be slightly more difficult to produce good A/F Mixture Quality, because of its large cooling effect. 


The lower the A/F Mixture Quality, the lower the power output the program will project.  Therefore, pay special attention to this number.  This is a change from all other pervious Engine Analyzer programs, which always assumed perfect A/F distribution and atomization. 
BSFC, lb/HP-hr 
Is the brake specific fuel consumption of the engine in lbs/HP-hr, or pounds of fuel per hour per horsepower.  BSFC is a measure of how efficiently the fuel is being used to produce power at the crankshaft.  A good BSFC is in the range of .40-.45 for gas and .95-1.10 for alcohol, near the torque peak RPM.  The lower the BSFC, the more efficient the engine is at converting fuel into HP. 
BSFC is based on total engine fuel flow, including any additional fuel required for the Nitrous Oxide if any is injected. 
BSAC, lb/HP-hr 
Is the brake specific air consumption of the engine in lbs/HP-hr, or pounds of air per hour per horsepower.  BSAC is a measure of how efficiently the air is being used to produce power at the crankshaft.  A good BSAC is in the range of 5.0 to 5.5 near the torque peak RPM. 
Friction HP 
Is the engine's friction horsepower.  This is the HP required to overcome all the rubbing, mechanical friction of the internal moving parts (bearings, rings, etc), oil pump, water pump and to drive any accessories, including the HP to drive a belt driven supercharger (if any). 
Note:  The friction calculated here is not the same as the friction measured during a dynamometer test where the engine is motored over by the dynamometer.  Motoring HP from a dynamometer will be higher since it includes the pumping work, the power required to ingest and expel air through the engine. 
Mach # 
The 1979 SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) paper "An Analysis of the Volumetric Efficiency Characteristics of 4-Stroke Cycle Engines Using the Mean Inlet Mach Number, Mim", 790484, by Fukutani and Watanabe is the basis of this calculation.  It was an extension of the Mach Index characteristic first identified in the 1940s by C.F. Taylor and co-workers from MIT, "The Internal Combustion Engine In Theory and Practice", C.F. Taylor, 1985, MIT Press.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
These papers state that an engine's air flow potential per cycle (volumetric efficiency) depends on its average intake flow coefficient, intake valve flow area, cylinder size, speed of sound in air and RPM.  These five terms are combined into one value called the Mach Index, called Mach # by the Engine Analyzer.  In simple terms Mach # relates the average velocity of the intake charge past the valve to the speed of sound.  The speed of sound is theoretically the maximum velocity possible past the valve, which would give a Mach # of 1.0. A Mach # of .4 states the average velocity is only 40% of the maximum possible velocity. 
Taylor's work showed good correlation between volumetric efficiency and Mach # for several engines with conservative cam timing.  The correlation showed that volumetric efficiency (and therefore power) would start to drop sharply when Mach # increased above approximately .55.  However, more recent studies show poor correlation if intake cam duration increases significantly.  The 1979 paper includes a correction for intake duration; the higher the intake duration, the lower the Mach #, and the higher the RPM for peak volumetric efficiency. 
General "rules of thumb" concerning the Mach # include: 
• 
Peak volumetric efficiency should occur in the range of .3 to .5 Mach # with no tuning effects 

• 
Volumetric efficiency drops rapidly in the range of .6 - .8 Mach # 


Piston Spd, ft/min 
Is the average speed of the piston in feet per minute.  Piston speed is a useful way to rate the RPM induced stress level of the reciprocating components of engines of very different sizes.  For example, engines with typical production parts can usually rev up to a piston speed on 2750 ft/min without overly stressing pistons, connecting rods, etc.   
The equation for piston speed is:
 Piston Speed = 2 x Stroke (inches) x RPM 12 
You can see that Piston Speed only depends on RPM and Stroke.  An engine with a 4” stroke  will reach 2750 ft/min at 4125 RPM, but an engine with only a 3 inch stroke can rev to 5500 before it reaches 2750 ft/min.  Both of these engines will be putting approximately the same stress on the rods and pistons at these quite different RPMs.  This is the reason 100 cc racing motorcycle engines can rev to 25000 RPM but 500 CID Pro Stock motors can only rev to 9000 RPM.  See also Piston Gs @ TDC. 
Piston Gs 
Is the piston acceleration in Gs where the piston changes direction at TDC.  TDC is generally where the highest piston Gs occur.  Internal stresses of many reciprocating components are directly related to piston Gs.  For example, if piston Gs increase 25%, you need parts which are 25% stronger.  Consult the manufacturer of your rotating and reciprocating components to determine their maximum G load ratings for various applications. 
Overlap %VE 
Is the amount volumetric efficiency increases due to scavenging during overlap.  This scavenging can aid overall volumetric efficiency if Overlap %VE is positive, but detracts from volumetric efficiency if it is negative. Overlap %VE is reported primarily to show scavenging effects due to tuning, or turbo/supercharging.  For example, if intake and exhaust tuning pressures should provide for good scavenging, but Overlap Area is small, Overlap %VE will be small also.  With good scavenging, Overlap %VE should be in the range of 5 to 10%. 
Int AvgVel 
Is the calculated average flow velocity of the intake charge in the intake runner.  A performance trade off exists between high and low runner velocity. Low flow velocities give little restriction to flow but posses little inertia.  High flow velocities show higher flow restriction, but also posses higher inertia to continue filling the cylinder after the piston has crossed BDC. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Sources vary greatly when recommending average intake flow velocities which give maximum volumetric efficiency (torque peak).  One source recommends only 80 to 180 ft/sec, another as high as 270-330 ft/sec.  Most recommendations fall between 150 to 250 ft/second. However, highly successful race designs have run as high as 400 ft/sec and higher.  Obviously there is no one optimum runner velocity. 
The Engine Analyzer bases optimum runner velocity on runner length.  Long runners give best volumetric efficiency at low runner velocities, since high velocities in long runners can be a restriction.  Short runners can tolerate higher velocities.  For typical runner lengths, the Engine Analyzer will use velocities ranging from 180 to 280 ft/sec. 
In InertiaPrs 
Is the estimated increase in pressure (over Intake Vacuum or supercharger Boost levels) caused by inertia tuning, in PSI.  High values of In InertiaPrs to 5 PSI) show good inertia tuning at that particular RPM.  In general, In InertiaPrs and intake tuning increases with improved Intake Manifold Flow Efficiency, Intake Manifold Type, Intake Valve Flow Efficiency and changes in intake cam timing. 
In ResTunPrs 
Is the estimated increase in pressure (over Intake Vacuum or supercharger Boost levels) during valve overlap caused by resonance tuning, in PSI.  High values of In ResTunPrs  (1 to 5 PSI) show favorable resonance tuning at that particular RPM.  Negative values of In ResTunPrs show resonance pulses limiting performance. 
Ex AvgVel 
Is the calculated average flow velocity of the exhaust gases in the exhaust runner.  Like with In AvgVel, a trade off exists between high and low runner velocity. High velocities are more restrictive, low velocities contribute little to exhaust inertia tuning. 
There is better agreement for "rules of thumb" concerning calculated exhaust velocity.  Most sources agree that header pipes should be sized to give average calculated flow velocities of 300 ft/sec.  Also see Example 4.5 and Appendix 5 for further explanation. 
The word "calculated" is stressed here because the actual exhaust gas velocities are much higher, in the range of 1000 ft/sec when the calculated velocity is 300 ft/sec.  This is primarily due to exhaust being approximately 3 times hotter and less dense than the intake charge. 
ExTun Prs 
Is the estimated increase in pressure over ExTun Prs (exhaust back pressure) during valve overlap, in PSI.  Since both inertia tuning and resonance tuning are only effective during overlap (immediately before exhaust closing), the two effects are added together.  Good exhaust scavenging will occur with large negative values of ExTun Prs (-1 to -5 PSI). 
Valve Toss Lifter Pump Up 
Indicates that the RPM has gone past the valve train’s safe operating range.  If you are simulating mechanical lifters (with Valve Lash), Valve Toss is shown here. If you are simulating hydraulic lifters (without Valve Lash), Lifter Pump Up is shown here.  Either condition will produce a drop in power. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Valve Toss and Lifter Pump Up depend strongly on the cam profile.  Aggressive ramps with high rocker arm ratios, aggressive roller profiles, high lobe lifts for a given duration do increase power, but also increase the likelihood of valve toss and pump up. 
Valve toss and Lifter Pump Up also depend strongly on the choice of Valve Train type you’ve chosen. 
Spark Adv 
Is the estimated spark advance in degrees before TDC for for optimum performance at this RPM under these conditions.  The Engine Analyzer automatically reduces (retards) Spark Adv  if detonation (spark knock or ping) is likely.  You will see an "*" following the Spark Adv value if it has been retarded.  You will also notice a HP and torque loss at RPMs where Spark Adv is retarded. 
Safety Note: You can not set your engine's spark advance curve based on the Engine Analyzer's Spark Adv calculations. Details in combustion chamber design, A/F distribution, cooling system design, etc. make predicting your engine's spark requirements impossible to predict accurately. 
Special Calculations 
Valve Flow & Cam Calculations Overlap Area, deg*sq-in 
Figure 2.19 Overlap Area 
This is the overlap flow area in units of degree-square inches.  These units can be illustrated using the example below.   
Example: If the Overlap Area was 4, it could mean that: 
• 
A valve area of four square inches was open for one degree of crank rotation. 

• 
A valve area of one square inch was open for four degrees of crank rotation. 

• 
A valve area of .4 square inches was open for 10 degrees of crank rotation. 

• 
Or any other combination which when multiplied together gives 4. 



The phrase "valve area of X square inches was open" means that a perfectly flowing hole measuring X square inches was present between the exhaust and intake port for 1 crank degree.  ("Perfectly flowing" means a flow coefficient of 1.0.) 
At idle conditions on a street engine, this is when intake vacuum can pull residual exhaust into the intake manifold.  The higher the Overlap Area, the higher the idle speed and the lower the idle vacuum.   
Note:  A larger cylinder can tolerate more Overlap Area.  A 500 CID V-8 may idle at 1000 RPM with a given overlap area, but a 250 CID V-8 with the same overlap area could idle at 2200. 
For race engines, overlap is generally needed for two reasons.  First, it provides lower cam acceleration rates to attain the high lifts required for high RPM HP.  Second, overlap can also improve performance by allowing for efficient purging of residual exhaust out of the clearance volume during overlap with proper intake and exhaust tuning.  However, at "untuned" RPMs, overlap can increase the potential for intake reversion (reverse air flow up the intake runner from the cylinder) and poor scavenging.  High overlap area 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
can also lead to poor fuel economy through "short circuiting" (where intake charge passes through the combustion chamber out the exhaust system without being used).   
Since turbocharged engines operate with high pressure and high temperature exhaust, Overlap Area is best kept to a minimum for turbocharged engines.  This is both to reduce reversion (when high pressure exhaust flows backward into the intake) and exhaust temperatures (when "short circuited" fresh charge burns in the exhaust). 
The Overlap Area is given here to compare overlap areas between different cam profiles, lash settings, and cylinder head flow potential.  Check Idle Vacuum, “Hg in this section also to see how Overlap Area effects an important aspect of street engine performance. 
Total Avg Flow Coef 
This is the average flow coefficient for the port, valve and runner for the time the valve is open.  It shows how well the port flows compared to a "perfectly" designed port with a "perfect" cam profile.  A perfect profile is defined as one where the valve opens immediately to a lift which gives maximum valve flow, stays open the entire duration, and immediately snaps shut at closing.  Figure 
2.20compares the actual flow curve with the theoretically "perfect" flow curves to illustrate Avg Flow Coef. 
Coefficient is an engineering term similar to efficiency, where a Flow Coefficient of 1.0 is the same as a Flow Efficiency of 100% (Flow Efficiency = Flow Coefficient x 100%).  The Total Avg Flow Coef will compare head and camshaft combinations.  An engine with a Total Avg Flow Coef of 1.0 is physically impossible to build but would run “real strong”.  In reality, the Total Avg Flow Coef will be approximately .25 for production engines, .30 to .40 for race 2 valve engines, and up to .50 or more for high RPM, 4 valve race engines with very agressive roller cams. 
Note:  
The average flow coefficient should not be confused with  Intake or Exhaust Flow Efficiencies in the cylinder Head(s) input specs.  Intake or Exhaust Flow Efficiency applies only to one particular valve lift (L/D=.25) and the flow at that lift.  The average flow coefficient applies to all valve lifts encountered for a particular cam profile, the portion of time at each lift, and the flow potential at 
each lift for the entire head. 
Technically, the calculation of flow coefficient can vary significantly with the choice of valve opening and closing points.  The lower the lift points chosen, the lower the flow coefficient. The Engine Analyzer uses a relatively low lift of .003" at the valve to calculate average flow coefficient. Therefore, average flow coefficients calculated by the Pro are likely to be less than average flow coefficients from other sources. 
Total Exh/Int % 
This is the percentage ratio of total exhaust flow area to intake flow area. It is calculated as: 
Total Exh/Int %  = Exhaust Vlv Area, deg*sq-in x 100% 
Intake Vlv Area, deg*sq­in 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
"Rules of thumb" state that the exhaust port does not produce significant power losses until the exhaust flow potential falls below 75% of the intake flow potential.  For supercharged or nitrous oxide engines this percent should increase to approximately 85%. 
Lobe Area, inch*deg 
Is the estimated area of the cam lift profile measured in tappet lift x cam degrees.  See Figure 2.21.   
Lobe 

Separation, deg 
Is the separation 
between the intake and exhaust lobe centerlines in 
camshaft degrees.  The Engine Analyzer assumes 
the centerline half way between the opening and 
closing events, or that the cam is symmetrical.  You would have to double this value to obtain lobe separation in crankshaft degrees. 
Vlv Area, deg*sq-in 
Is the valve opening flow area in units of degree-square inches, similar units to Overlap Area, deg*sq-in.  This value represents the total effective flow area available for the intake or exhaust valves while they are open, not just when both are open. It is calculated from the valve lift curve and the valve flow curve.  See Figure 2.22.  Unlike the Avg Flow Coef. number, this value does increase directly as valve duration and valve size increases.  It is these areas upon which Total Exh/Int, % is based. 
The Vlv Area is given here to compare valve opening areas between different cam profiles, lash settings, valve sizes and port Flow Efficiencies. Also like Overlap Area, deg*sq-in, larger cylinders will require larger valve areas for similar volumetric efficiency. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Lobe Centerlns, deg 
Intake and Exhaust lobe center is simply calculated from the appropriate opening and closing events and assumes a symmetric cam lobe. The intake lobe center is given in crank degrees after TDC, the exhaust lobe center is given in crank degrees before TDC. 
General Engine Calculations 
Displacement, CCs 
Is the total engine displacement volume (swept volume) in cubic centimeters.  This is based on the standard equation including bore, stroke and # cylinders. Divide this value by 1000 to obtain engine displacement in liters.  For example, 4900 CCs is 4900 / 1000 = 
4.9liters. 
Displacement, cu in 
Is the total engine displacement volume (swept volume) in cubic inches.  This is based on the standard equation including bore, stroke and # cylinders.   
Dynamic Comp. Ratio 
Dynamic Comp Ratio is calculated like the Compression Ratio in the Head Specs menu except, the "swept" volume used is the cylinder volume at intake valve closing.  Some people believe this is a more realistic compression ratio because the piston cannot compress the air until the intake valve has closed.   
Dynamic Comp. Ratio = Clearance Volume + Cyl Vol @ Intake Valve Closing Clearance Volume 
The Dynamic Comp. Ratio is always less than the standard Compression Ratio, and ranges from 6 to 9 for most engines. You've probably heard that long duration cams need higher compression ratios.  You will notice that when you specify long duration cams, with late intake valve closing, you must also specify a higher Compression Ratio to maintain a Dynamic Comp. Ratio in the range from 6 to 9. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Compression Ratio 
Simply restates the specified Compression Ratio in the Head Specs menu for comparison to Dynamic Comp. Ratio. 
Theo. Crank Comprssn,PSI 
Is the estimated cranking compression pressure in pounds per square inch based on compression ratio, estimated intake cam profile and lash. The calculation assumes some heat losses and leakage (uses ratio of specific heats of 1.3 rather than 1.4).  Your actual cranking compression (100-200 RPM) will likely be less due primarily to leakage and heat losses.  Actual compression pressures can be higher with hydraulic lifters, especially high leakdown lifters.  High RPM compression (1000 RPM or higher) would more closely match this value.  Theo. Crank Comprssn is reported simply to show trends. 
Clearance Volume, CCs 
Is the calculated total clearance volume in cubic centimeters (piston dish/dome, chamber volume, deck and gasket volume) based on the given Bore, Stroke, Compression Ratio. 
Est Idle Vac, ''Hg 
Is the estimated idle vacuum at 1500 RPM, with no load on the engine (no torque converter).  The Engine Analyzer assumes a constant Barometric Pressure of 29.92 and typical dynamometer testing accessories (water pump, but no fan, power steering, alternator, air conditioning, etc. 
Starting Point Suggestions: Pk HP Peak @ xxxx RPM 
These 'Starting Point' suggestions are for users who want help choosing "ball park" cam specs and/or runner sizes for good performance at a particular RPM. These recommendations are very general, being based on very simplified "rules of thumb".  They are based on the current cam specs, bore, stroke, etc.  Therefore, you will get somewhat different recommendations as engine specs change. 
Notes: 
• 
The RPM for these recommendations is entered in the Running Conditions menu under the heading ‘Starting Point’ Recommendations as “For Peak HP at This RPM”.  See page 67. 

• 
Veteran engine builders can likely pick better 'Starting Point' Specs than the program simply from their experience.  The "fine tuning" of these specs through detailed, "cut and try" analysis on the computer is the Engine Analyzer’s real strength. 


Starting Point suggestions given here are based on current engine specs and may NOT give best performance and MUST be refined through 'cut and try' running the program.  Runner Dimensions are for Port PLUS Intake Manifold Runner or Exhaust Header Primary Pipe. 
What this means is that these specs might be a good first try.  But then you should start making small changes in runner lengths, diameters, cam advance and retard, duration, centerlines, etc.  Constantly compare what these changes do compared to the performance these “Starting Point Suggestion” produced. Keep the best combination, which could be quite different than these suggestions. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Intake Dimensions (for x Runner/cylinder ): 
The following sets of lengths and areas/diameters are combinations which are tuned to the RPM specified.  The notation in parentheses identifies if the areas and diameters assume 1 or 2 runners per cylinder based on your inputs for Port Layout in the Heads specs menu.  For example, the area given for 2 runners per cylinder will be approximately half the area recommended for 1 runner per cylinder.  
These lengths and areas are based on simplistic "rules of thumb" concerning inertia tuning described in Appendix 3.  The actual tuning simulated by the Engine Analyzer is more detailed and may not completely agree with these recommendations.  Therefore, use the recommendations in this section as a guide, or starting point for choosing runner sizes. 
These lengths and diameters are also based on the current cam specs. If you change cam specs (for example to those recommended later in this section), these runner suggestions will change also. 
Rec Inertia Len, in and Rec area sq in/in 
Is the recommended total length of the intake runner from the valve seat to the first abrupt opening for good inertia tuning and runner velocity.  This is the sum of Port Length plus Runner Length in the cylinder Head(s) and Intake System menus.  This abrupt opening could be a plenum, branching together with another intake runner, or an opening to atmosphere.  See Runner Length under Intake System. 
Given to the right of the recommended length is recommended runner inside cross sectional area in square inches and inside diameter in inches. This area will give adequate runner velocity for this length runner at this RPM.  If you have a rectangular runner, calculate the recommended width and height from the following formulas:
 Rec Width = Rec Area Rec Height = Rec Area . Current Runner Height Current Runner Width 
         For example, if the recommended area was 2.08 sq in, and your current runner was 1.8 x 1.0: 
Rec Width = 2.08 = 1.16" Rec Height = 2.08 = 2.08” 1.8 1.0 
You could either enlarge the width from 1.0" to 1.16" or enlarge the height from 1.8" to 2.08" to obtain the recommended area, but not both. If you want to increase both width and height, the final dimensions multiplied together should equal the recommended area. 
Spec Inertia Len, in and Rec Area sq in/in 
Is the length specified in the Running Conditions menu as For This Int Runner Length.  The area and diameter given will give optimum inertia tuning for this engine and this specified runner length.  However, runner velocity may not be optimum.  Also see Rec Inertia Len, in and Rec Area, sq in/in. 
Rec Len, 2nd Pulse, in and Rec Area sq in/in 
Is the intake runner length to produce strong resonance tuning for this engine.  This will appear in the Test Results as a strong In ResTunPrs pressure at this RPM.  This resonance pulse is from the second reflection and is usually the strongest pulse available for 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
resonance tuning. The area and diameter given will also give optimum inertia tuning for this engine and this runner length.  Also see Rec Inertia Len, in and Rec Area, sq in/in. 
Rec Len, 3rd Pulse, in and Rec Area sq in/in 
Is the intake runner length to produce strong resonance tuning for this engine.  This will appear in the Test Results as a strong In ResTunPrs pressure at this RPM.  This resonance pulse is from the third reflection and is usually not as strong as the second pulse.  The area and diameter given will also give optimum inertia tuning for this engine and this runner length.  Also see Rec Inertia Len, in and Rec Area, sq in/in. 
You can determine the Port Volume for any diameter given in this section by going to the Head(s) Specs menu and typing it in for Intake Port Avg Diameter and seeing what Port Volume is calculated. For this Port Volume to be accurate, you must also have entered the correct Port Length in the Head(s) Specs menu first. 
Exhaust Dimensions ( for x Runner/cylinder): 
Similar to the intake recommendations, the assumed number of exhaust runners per cylinder is also stated in parentheses. This assumption is based on the Layout in the Exhaust section of the Head(s) menu.  For example, the area given for 2 runners per cylinder will be approximately half the area recommended for 1 runner per cylinder. 
Rec Len, 1st Pulse and Rec Area,300ft/sec 
Is the exhaust runner length (from the valve to the collector) to produce strong resonance tuning for this engine.  This resonance pulse is from the first reflection and is usually the strongest pulse available for exhaust resonance tuning. 
The area and diameter given will produce an average "calculated" exhaust runner velocity of 300 ft/sec.  Several sources state this velocity gives good exhaust inertia tuning.  The Pro’s detailed calculations do not use this simple “rule of thumb” but it is a good starting point for many engines. 
Rec Len, 2nd Pulse and Primary Tube O.D. 
Is the exhaust runner length (from the valve to the collector) to produce strong resonance tuning for this engine.  This resonance pulse is from the second reflection and is usually not as strong as the first pulse. 
The diameter given is for the outside diameter of 18 gauge tubing which will give a "calculated" exhaust runner velocity of approximately 300 ft/sec.  Also see Rec Len, 1st Pulse and Rec Area, 300 ft/sec. 
Approx Cam Specs for HP Peak @ xxxx ( based on current cam ): 
The following cam specs are estimated to produce a HP peak at the RPM specified above as @ xxxx.  These recommendations are based on these assumptions: 
• 
HP peak will appear at certain Mach #s.  Mach # is based only on intake valve flow potential, intake cam profile and engine size.  See Mach # definition on page 76. 

• 
Tuning effects are not included, which have a large impact on the particular cam profile and cam timing (lobe centerline) to use. 

• 
Changes in cam duration and lift will produce predictable changes in intake valve flow potential.  The more different the current cam's specs are from the recommended cam's specs, the more error in this assumption. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Therefore, it is obvious that these recommendations can not accurately predict what camshaft to use for a particular application, but are only a starting point.  These recommendations must be optimized by calculating performance with the Engine Analyzer, making small changes to these cam specs and then recalculating performance. 
Notes: 
The reliability of these recommendations depends on how close the current cam's specs are to the recommended specs.  If they are significantly different (i.e. current duration is 200 degrees and recommended duration is 300 degrees), the recommendations will not be as reliable. In these cases, enter the recommended cam specs in the Cam/Valve Train menu and recalculate performance.  The new cam recommendations will be more reliable. 
The duration recommendations are limited to 320 degrees maximum and .550" tappet lift maximum. 
HP Pk Int Dur @ .050 and HP Pk, Int Tappet Lift 
Is the recommended intake duration at .050" tappet lift to produce a HP peak at the specified RPM.  The Tappet Lift is a typical lift for a cam lobe with this duration @ .050" designed for a typical American, pushrod V-8. 
HP Pk, Exh Dur @ .050 and HP Pk, Exh Tappet Lift 
Is the recommended exhaust duration at .050" tappet lift to produce approximately 75% exhaust flow area compared to intake flow area of the intake cam profile recommended.  If the engine is currently supercharged or nitrous injected, this percent is raised to 85%.  The Tappet Lift is a typical lift for a cam lobe with this duration @ .050" designed for a typical American, pushrod V-8. . 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9 Calculation Menus: 
Check Appendix 5 and 6 for new Calculation Menus added for versions 3.2 and 3.4, std and Plus. 
The following section explains the user input for engine specs listed with Clc buttons.  These specs are ones where you can simply enter a value, or click on the Clc button and the program will present a menu of inputs which will calculate that particular parameter, or a list of typical examples.  These menus are like computer “scratch pads” for calculating specs like compression ratio, runner diameters from other inputs. 
Notes: 
The starting values in each calculation menu are usually blanked out.  If there is other information in the program to estimate what one of you inputs will be, it may be loaded.  For example, Runner Length would be set to whatever value was currently in the Intake Manifold specs menu. However, you are free to change this number to whatever you want. 
Once enough specs have been entered, the calculated value(s) at the top of the menu will be displayed.  This calculated value(s) will now be updated each time you change a spec.  If you want to use this calculated value, click on Use Calc Value. If the calculated value is within expected limits, it will be loaded into the original menu.  If you click on Cancel, you will be returned to the original menu with the original value unchanged.  If you click on Help, you will be given a general explanation of calculation menus, and a page # in this section for more information about the particular menu you are using.  If you click on Print, you can print this menu on your printer with some comment you can enter. 
The input values or calculated values in any calculation menu have NO affect on calculated performance unless you load the Calculated value into the original menu. If you already know a spec in the form required by the program, then you have no need to use the calculation menu. 
For example, if you know the Compression Ratio is 10.3, you have no need to use a calculation menu to calculate Compression Ratio based on Gasket Thickness, Piston Dome CCs, etc. 
Example: 
You are working with a particular engine.  Assume you want to calculate the Avg Port Diameter for the intake manifold runner menu for a new manifold.  You click on the Clc button for Runner Diameter and are shown the Calculation Menu shown in Figure 2.40.  Note that all inputs are blank except Runner Length which is copied from the current Runner Length in the Intake Manifold specs.  Also note that only the Know Port CCs? spec is enabled (not dimmed to gray). 
Click on the combo box arrow for Know Port CCs? spec to answer the question Yes or No.  Lets say you select Yes, because you do know the runner CCs. This is usually the more accurate way to measure average runner diameter.  The specs of Port Length and Port Volume are now enabled (printed in black, not gray). You enter in the values for the new manifold of Length of 5 inches and a Port Volume of 200 CCs and obtain a Calc Avg Diameter of 1.76.  If you click on Cancel, you will return to the cylinder Head(s) menu with Avg Port Diameter at its original value. 
If you had clicked on Use Calc Value, you would have returned to the cylinder Head(s) menu with Avg Port Diameter set to the new calculated value of 1.76.  If you now calculate performance, it will be based on the new Avg Port Diameter of 1.76". 
If you change one of the preloaded specs (in the example above you changed the preloaded Runner Length of 6” to 5”), the program will ask if you want to use that new value also.  If you say Yes, the preloaded value will be changed as well.  In the example above, answer Yes and the new Runner Length you entered into the Calculation Menu of 5” will also be loaded into the Intake Manifold Specs menu for Runner Length. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.1 Calc Bore 
This calculation is available at the Short Block menu and lets you calculate what Bore is required to produce a certain Cubic Inch displacement for a given Stroke and # Cylinders.  See introduction to Calculation Menus on page 91 for understanding how Calculation Menus work. 
Desired Cubic Inches 
Is the cubic inch displacement you want for this engine combination. 
Stroke, inches 
Is the Stroke for this engine.  Stroke is the distance the piston travels from TDC to BDC. 

# Cylinders 
Is the number of cylinders in this engine.  For example, for a V-8 this would be 8. 
2.9.2 Calc Stroke 
This calculation is available at the Short Block menu and lets you calculate what Stroke is required to produce a certain Cubic Inch displacement for a given Stroke and # Cylinders.  See introduction to Calculation Menus on page 91 for understanding how Calculation Menus work. 
Desired Cubic Inches 
Is the cubic inch displacement you want for this engine combination. 
Bore, inches 
Is the Bore for this engine.  Bore is the diameter of one cylinder. 
# Cylinders 
Is the number of cylinders in this engine.  For example, for a V-8 this would be 8. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.3 Calc Compression Ratio 

in the Short Block menu).  Compression Ratio is defined on page 21 under cylinder Head(s) specs. See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
The equation for Compression Ratio depends on the cylinder displacement.  This displacement is based on the current Bore and Stroke in the Short Block menu  and is displayed in the Notes section at the bottom of this menu.  Make sure these specs match the engine for which you are calculating Compression Ratio before using this menu. 
Performance Trends offers a very detailed Compression Ratio Calculator program on its website:  www.performancetrends.com. 
Chamber Specs 
Chamber CCs in Head 
Is the combustion chamber volume in the cylinder head, measured in cubic centimeters.  This is the value obtained if the heads are "cc'd". 
If you know the entire clearance volume of the cylinder, but do not know Piston Dome CCs, Gasket Thickness or Deck Height Clearance, enter that volume here as Chamber CCs in Head.  Then enter 0 for Piston Dome CCs, Gasket Thickness and Deck Height Clearance.  The program will calculate compression ratio based on the equation below where Clearance Volume is the Chamber CCs in Head. 
Compression Ratio = Clearance Volume + Swept Volume Clearance Volume 
Piston Dome CCs 
Is the volume of the "pop up" in the piston measured in cubic centimeters.  The "pop up" is the volume of piston material added to the top of a flat top piston.  If the piston has a "dish" (depression), enter the dish volume as a negative (-) number. 
Gasket Thickness, in 
Is the thickness of the head gasket in inches after it has been "crushed".  "Crushed" thickness is after the head bolts have been torqued to spec. 
Gasket Bore Diameter, in 
Is the diameter of the bore in the head gasket.  A good approximation is to use the same as the Bore in the Short Block Specs menu, and this value is loaded in when you first open up this menu. You can change it to most any value you want. (In actual use, gasket bores are usually .030-.100” larger than the cylinder bore.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Deck Height Clearance, in 
Deck Height Clearance is the distance in inches from the top of the piston to the top of the cylinder block when the piston is at TDC.  
The top of the cylinder is the deck, or surface to which the head bolts.  If the outer edge of the piston travels above the deck, this is called negative deck height and you must enter a negative (-) number. 
2.9.4 Calc Avg Port Diameter 
Is the Port Diameter or Runner Diameter calculated from following specs. Port Diameter is defined on page 22 under cylinder Head(s) specs.  Runner Diameter is defined on page 32 under Intake System specs and on page 38 under Exhaust System specs.  See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Know Port CCs? 
Click on this combo box to select Yes or No.  Your choice here will enable (turn to black print from gray and allow for inputs) different specs in this menu.  You must select this choice first before any other specs in this menu can be entered. 

Calculating Avg Diameter from volume is generally the more accurate method.  However, for the Intake Port, this is automatically done for you in the main Heads Specs menu.  Port Diameter is calculated and displayed based on the current Port Length as you enter in Port Volume in CCs.   
For exhaust headers, it is usually best to simply subtract .1" from the tubing OD to obtain the inside runner diameter, and not use this Calculation Menu. 
Port Length, in 
The length of the port or runner along its centerline in inches.  For a port, this would start at the valve stem (center) location at the valve seat or valve throat. It would continue down the middle of the port to the manifold or header mating surface.  For many intake ports, 5" is a typical length. 
For an intake runner, this is the length from the cylinder head to the first "abrupt enlargement"  upstream of the cylinder head.  The "abrupt enlargement" can be several different things: 
• 
The intake manifold plenum.  The plenum is the open area where all the runners merge, directly under the carburetor(s) or after the throttle body on fuel injected manifolds.  The best example of a plenum is the very evident “box” on “tunnel ram” type manifolds. 

• 
The end which is open to atmosphere (or air cleaner) on individual runner fuel injection or carburetion.  For individual runner carb systems, the runner length actually extends through the carb and through any velocity stack or air horn. 

• 
Any point where a runner from one cylinder merges with a runner from another cylinder. 


Again, for the Exhaust Runner Diameter, it is usually best to simply subtract .1" from exhaust header tubing OD to estimate their inside runner diameters, rather than use this calculation menu. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Port/Runner Volume. CCs 
Is the volume of liquid required to fill the port or runner in cubic centimeters.  For a cylinder head, this is a common spec head manufacturers quote.   
For an intake, you will likely have to measure this yourself.  This measurement does not require the precision of "CC’ing" combustion chambers.  That's because for most intake or exhaust manifolds there is no clear distinction where the runner ends.  Cover the "manifold to head" mounting surface with a plate or heavy tape.  Tip the manifold so you can pour in liquid from a graduated cylinder or other measuring device, through the carb or exhaust pipe opening.  Fill until you believe the liquid is to the "abrupt enlargement" defined above. 
Port Width, in 
The average width of the port or runner along its entire length in inches. This can usually be estimated at the end of the port or runner at the cylinder head-manifold/header mating surface. 
Port Height, in 
The average height of the port or runner along its entire length in inches.  This can usually be estimated at the end of the port or runner at the cylinder head-manifold/header mating surface.  

        Rounded Rectangular 
Port Shape 
Describes the general shape of the runner along its entire length.  Your choices are: 
• 
Rectangular 

• 
Rounded Rectangular 

• 
Oval A purely Rectangular runner would have sharp corners and a purely Oval runner would be 2 semicircles connected by 2 straight sections.  See Figure 2.28.  Actual runners are likely somewhere between these two shapes, which is the Rounded Rectangular choice. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.5 Calc Valve Flow Efficiency 
Click on the Clc button by Flow Efficiency in the Head(s) menu and you are first presented with the screen of Figure 2.29.  Click on Yes only if you have flow bench data.  Then you will be presented with the menu shown in section 2.9.5.2.  If you answer No you are presented with the menu  below in section 2.9.5.1. 
2.9.5.1 Estimated Flow Efficiency 
This calculation menu simply presents a list general descriptions of ports and a typical Flow Efficiency.   
Pick Intake Port Description Pick Exhaust Port Description 
Simply click on the down arrow for the combo box for the list to appear, then click on your choice.  There are more choices than can appear at 1 time on the list so be sure to scroll down through all choices.  The Flow Efficiency for your choice will appear at the top 

as the Est Valve Flow Efficiency. 
2.9.5.2 Calculated Flow Efficiency 
This calculation menu calculates Flow Efficiency from flow bench data for either the intake or exhaust port and valve from following specs.  Valve Flow Efficiency is defined on pages 18-20 under cylinder Head(s) specs.  You would use this menu only if you have flow bench data for your ports. See page 91 for 

general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Test Pressure, “Water 
Is the pressure drop maintained across the port and valve during the flow test, measured in inches of water.  From Figure 2.32, you would enter 25.  If you have test pressure in inches of Mercury, multiply by 13.6 to obtain "Water. 
Test Pressure, " Water = Test Pressure, " Mercury x 13.6 
This is initially set to the “Default Test Pressure”.  (When you first get your program this is set to 28 because 28” is so common.)  However, you can change Test Pressure to most anything you want.  Ten (10) and 25” are other common flow bench test pressures. 
If you usually get flow data at some pressure other than 28”, you can change the Default Test Pressure by clicking on Preferences at the Main Screen, then Set Default Test Pressure (currently xx”).  See Preferences on page 14 of this manual. 
 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5                       Valve Lift, inches 

# Valves/Cylinder 
The number of intake or exhaust valves being flowed during the test.  Most cylinder heads have only 1 intake and 1 exhaust valve, so this value would be 1.  This number is set to whatever is currently in the Layout spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
Valve Diameter, in 
Identifies the outside (largest) diameter of the head of the valve(s) in inches.  From Figure 2.32, you would enter 1.52. This number is set to whatever is currently in the Valve Diameter spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
Valve Lift Tested, in 
Is the valve lift at which the flow data CFM is measured.  Use a valve lift (and corresponding CFM flow) as close as practical to one fourth the valve head's diameter.  A range of lifts close to 1/4 the valve’s diameter is given in the Notes at the bottom of this menu  The program will warn you when Valve Lift is not 1/4 of Valve Diameter in this menu.  For example, for a 1.52" diameter valve, use flow (CFM) at .38" valve lift. CFM at .4 lift would also be acceptable.  See Figure 2.32. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Note:  This is NOT valve lift produced by the cam 
Flow Obtained, CFM 
Is the CFM flow obtained at the valve lift given for Valve Lift.  Shown in Figure 
2.32 is a typical flow curve from a flow bench.  For this data you would use the 192 CFM value. For most conditions, it is best to install a radiused inlet on the intake and a short "stub stack" on the exhaust, rather than just flow the head only. 
2.9.6 Runner Flow Efficiency 
Click on the Clc button by Flow Efficiency in the Intake menu  or Exhaust menu and you are first presented with the screen of Figure 2.33.  Click on Yes only if you have flow bench data.  Then you will be presented with the menu shown in section 2.9.6.2.  If you answer No you are presented with the menu  below in section 2.9.6.1. 

2.9.6.1 Estimated Runner Flow Efficiency 
This calculation menu simply presents a list general descriptions of ports and a typical Flow Efficiency.   
Pick Manifold Description Pick Header Description 
Simply click on the down arrow for the combo box for the list to appear, then click on your choice. There are more choices than can appear at 1 time on the list so be sure to scroll down through all choices.  The Flow Efficiency for your choice will appear at the top as the Est Flow Efficiency. 
2.9.6.2 Calc Runner Flow Efficiency 
Is the intake or exhaust runner Flow Efficiency calculated from the following specs.  Runner Flow Efficiency is defined on page 26 under Intake System specs and page 36 under Exhaust System specs.  Also see Section 2.9.4 describing Valve Flow Efficiency.  See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Flow Data, Head Only Test Pressure, “Water 
The pressure drop maintained across the port, valve and runner during both portions of the flow test, measured in inches of water.  If you have test pressure in inches of Mercury, multiply by 13.6 to obtain "Water. 
Test Pressure, " Water = Test Pressure, " Mercury x 13.6 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
This is initially set to the Default Test Pressure (usually 28”) when you enter this menu.  However, you can change it to most anything you want.  Ten (10) and 25” are other common flow bench test pressures.  See Test Pressure in Calc Valve Flow Effcy, Section 2.9.5. 
# Valves/Cylinder 
The number of intake or exhaust valves being flowed during the test.  Most cylinder heads have only 1 intake and 1 exhaust valve, so this value would be 1.  This number is set to whatever is currently in the # Valves/Ports spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
Valve Dia 
Identifies the outside (largest) diameter of the head of the valve(s) in inches.  This number is set to whatever is currently in the Valve Diameter spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
Valve Lift Tested, in 
Is the valve lift at which the flow data CFM is measured.  Use a valve lift (and corresponding CFM flow) as close as practical to one fourth the valve head's diameter.  A range of lifts close to 1/4 the valve’s diameter is given in the Notes at the bottom of this menu  The program will warn you when Valve Lift is not 1/4 of Valve Diameter in this menu.  For example, for a 1.52" diameter valve, use flow (CFM) at .38" valve lift. CFM at .4 lift would also be acceptable.  See Figure 2.33. 

Note:  This is NOT valve lift produced by the cam 
Flow w/o Runner, CFM 
Is the CFM flow obtained at the valve lift given for Valve Lift with only the cylinder head being flowed.  This flow should be the maximum obtainable for the head only. 
To obtain maximum flows, the entrance to the intake port should have an "optimum bell mouth" or "radiused" adapter for smooth air entry.  The exhaust side may also benefit from installing a short (3-12"), straight section of smooth pipe.  You can experiment by simply holding tubes of various lengths and diameters up to the exhaust port, to see the effect on flow.  Once you know the approximate dimensions which give maximum exhaust flow, you may want to make a more permanent exhaust adapter for your flow tests. 
Flow Data with x Runner 
The x in this heading is to indicate you must flow all runners connected to this cylinder for this test.  For example, if the engine has 2 intake valves and 2 intake runners for each cylinder, you must first flow both valves with no runner, then add both runners and flow them again. 
Runner Diameter, in 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Is the Runner Diameter you will use for this runner in either the Intake or Exhaust System menu.  This value is initially loaded into this menu, but you can change it if you want.  If the runner is primarily oval or rectangular, use the Calc Runner Diameter calculation menu in the Intake or Exhaust System menu first to obtain an effective Runner Diameter. 
Flow with Runner 
Once you have the maximum flow value for the head only, Flow  w/o Runner, install the manifold or header.  At exactly the same valve lift and test pressure, repeat the test.  Your flow value should drop.  If it does not drop, obviously you did not have an optimum entrance or exit adapter, since the manifold you are now flowing is more optimum. 
The Engine Analyzer should calculate a value for Calc Flow Efficiency of somewhere between 50 and 100%.  The larger the drop in flow between the head only and head plus manifold/header, the worse (smaller) the runner Flow Efficiency.  However, like Valve Flow Efficiency, a small runner which reduces flow considerable, may have an excellent Flow Efficiency.  This means it is well designed for its size, but its size is the restriction, not its design. 
If you enter a Flow with Runner which is greater than or equal to Flow w/o Runner, the Engine Analyzer simply calculates a maximum flow Efficiency of 100%. 
Notes: 
When flow testing an intake manifold, be sure the other runners are blocked off.  Also, do not install the carburetor.  The Engine Analyzer treats the carburetor restriction differently from the valve, port and runner restrictions.  Occasionally a manifold may flow better with the carb or throttle body than without.  In these instances, you should provide an "optimum entrance" at the carb pad, since the carb itself would be a significant restriction.  An optimum entrance can be molded out of clay. 
It may be more convenient to just flow the cylinder head with the intake and exhaust manifold/header installed, rather than trying to develop "optimum adapters".  If this is what you want to do, see Example 4.5.  If you did not exactly have an "optimum" adapter for obtaining Flow w/o Runner, then your Valve Flow Efficiency will be too low and your Runner Flow Efficiency will be too high.  Also see Examples 4.5 and 4.6. 
Accurate determination of Runner Flow Efficiency has three advantages: 
• 
You can more accurately swap manifold runners onto heads (in the computer) which have not been flowed together. 

• 
You gain insight as to manifold and header flow restriction and design.  Manifolds and headers with low flow Efficiencies have much potential for flow gains from redesign and porting.  Flow restrictions from components with high flow Efficiencies indicate the size of the component is more of a restriction than its design.   

• 
Runner Flow Efficiency has a significant effect on tuning, however this effect is not yet clearly understood.  See Appendix 3. 


2.9.7 Calc CFM Flow Rating 
Is the CFM Flow Rating calculated from the following specs.  CFM Flow Rating is defined on page 35 under Intake System specs.  See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.   
You will first be presented with the screen of Figure 2.36.  If you answer Yes, you will be presented with the specs outlined in 2.9.7.2.  If you answer No, the following specs will be presented, Section 2.9.7.1. 
Note: The most accurate way to determine the CFM Flow Rating is to flow the component on a flow bench.  The second best way is to use the manufacturer's CFM rating at 1.5" Hg, or rating at 3" Hg and convert it to 1.5" by multiplying by .71.  Only if these other methods are not available, should you use the Calculation Menu based on diameter measurements. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.7.1 Calc CFM Flow Rating Total # Pri. Throttle Plates 

The total # of primary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 2. 
Primary Throttle Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter. 
Total # Sec. Throttle Plates 
The total # of secondary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 4. 
Secondary Throttle Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Sec Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter.  If Total # Sec. Throttle Plates is set to 0, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
Note: Primary throttles and secondary throttles are not treated differently in this calculation menu.  The only reason they are listed separately here is to easily handle throttle plates which are different sizes.  For example, if the primary and secondary throttles were the same size in the three 2 barrel examples above, you could have used 6 Pri Throttles, 0 Sec Throttles and arrived at the same answer. 
Restrictor Plate Specs 
Restrictor Plate Installed 
If the carb is used with a restrictor plate, choose Yes.  Restrictor plates are special orifice plates mounted below (or after) the carburetor to limit power for special classes of racing.  Chances are, if you do not know what a restrictor plate is, you would choose No here. 
# Restrictor Holes 
The total # holes in the restrictor plate which all engine air must pass through.  If Restrictor Plate Installed is set to No, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
Hole Diameter; in 
The diameter of each hole in the restrictor plate in inches.  If Restrictor Plate Installed is set to No, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
% Design Improved 
This spec has to do with how the orifice plate is mounted, and what type of transition pieces can be installed on top and below the plate. A plate with no transition pieces and several inches between the carb and the restrictor plate would be called 0 % improved.  Where class rules allow, the plate may be "sandwiched" between transition pieces, which can greatly improve flow.  

If Restrictor Plate Installed is set to No, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
2.9.7.2 Calc CFM Flow Rating 
Is the CFM Flow Rating calculated from flow bench data. 
Note:  Since this calculation is based on flow data for the actual carburetor or throttle body, this is the most accurate method of determining CFM Flow Rating.  If the value you obtain here is significantly different than the manufacturer's CFM rating at 1.5" Hg, double check your flow data.  The manufacturer's CFM rating should not be more than 15% different, unless you have made modifications to the carb. 
Flow Bench Data 
Flow Bench Flow, CFM 
The CFM recorded when flowing the carb or throttle body on the flow bench. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Bench Test Pres, “ water 
The test pressure when flowing the carb or throttle body on the flow bench.  This is usually 10, 20, 25 or 28 inches of water.  If you flow at 20.4" of water, you are flowing at 1.5" Hg and the CFM you record is the carb's CFM Flow Rating.  Since carbs are usually flowed so differently than heads, this menu does not automatically set Test Pres to the Default Test Pressure mentioned in Section 2.9.5 and 2.9.6. 
% Carb Flowed 
Choices in this combo box let you describes if these flow numbers represent the engine's total carburetor or throttle body flow area.  For example: 
• 
If you flowed 1 4BBL carb and the engine is run with this 1 4BBL, you would choose 100%.  These flow numbers represent the engine's entire carburetor flow. 

• 
If you flowed 1 4BBL carb, but the engine is run with dual 4BBLs, you would choose 50%, since the test CFM for 1 4BBL only represents half of the engine's carburetors. 

• 
Assume you have a small flow bench and a Quadra-Jet carb.  If you flow the entire carb, the test pressure is quite low.  However if you block off 1 secondary and 1 primary, the test pressure increases up to 6 ''water.  You record 202 CFM for this condition.  You would enter 6 for Bench Test Pres, 202 for Flow Bench Flow and choose 50% for % Carb Flowed. 


Note:  This specs says % Carb flowed but it is equally accurate to estimating the CFM Flow Rating of a throttle body system.  
2.9.8 Calc Exh Sys CFM Rating 
Is the Exhaust/Muffler System CFM Rating calculated from the following specs. Exhaust/Muffler System CFM Ratings s defined on page 40 under Exhaust System specs.  See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Note:  The CFM Rating calculated in this menu is a very approximate estimate.  That is because both inputs are vague and open to interpretation.  For that reason, please read Exhaust/Muffler System CFM Rating starting on page 40 for alternate methods to estimate this value. 
Engine HP 
The rated horsepower output of the engine for which the exhaust system was originally designed.  This defines the approximate amount of exhaust flow the system was designed to handle. 
Type of Vehicle 
Describes the application for which the exhaust system was originally designed.  This defines the approximate amount of backpressure the exhaust system was designed to produce. 
• 
Full Race is an exhaust system with extremely low back pressure, designed for classes of racing where rules require mufflers. 

• 
Aftermarket is an exhaust system with very low back pressure, but still quiet enough for the street (as long as you do not go full throttle). 

• 
Prod Sporty is a production exhaust system for performance and sports cars which must pass full power noise standards.  

• 
Prod Quiet is a production exhaust system for a family sedan or luxury sedan where a "throaty" engine roar is undesirable. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.9 Calc Max Lobe Lift 
Is the maximum lobe or tappet lift for the cam. Max Lobe Lift is defined on page 47 under Cam/Valve Train specs.  See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Advertised Valve Lift, in 
The valve lift you see in the cam grinder’s ads,  catalog or cam card in inches. 
Assumed Rocker Arm Ratio 
The Rocker Arm Ratio assumed by the cam grinder for the particular engine.  This should be stated somewhere in the catalog or on the card.  Note that this assumed rocker arm ratio may be different than what you are actually using on the engine. 

2.9.10 Calc Belt Ratio 
Is the Belt Ratio for either a Roots or Centrifugal supercharger calculated from the following specs.  Belt Ratio is defined on page 58 and page 61 under Roots Supercharger and Centrifugal Supercharger specs.  See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and 
for an example of their use.  
S/C Pulley Diameter, in 
The diameter of the supercharger pulley measured in inches.  This can also be the number of cogs on this pulley if you are using a cogged belt. Then you must also use # cogs for Crank Pulley Diameter, not inches. 
Crank Pulley Diameter, in 
The diameter of the crankshaft pulley which drives the supercharger measured in inches. This can also be the number of cogs on this pulley if you are using a cogged belt.  Then you must also use # cogs for S/C Pulley Diameter, not inches. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.11 Notes on Barometric Pressure & Elevation 
This menu simply displays the relationship between barometric pressure and elevation specifications, as explained in Section 2.8.1, page 63 and 64. Refer to those pages for further details.  Click on OK or press the <space bar> to return to the Running Conditions menu with no change to either Barometric Pressure or Elevation. 
2.9.12 Calc Dew Point, deg F 
Is the Dew Point, Deg F calculated from the following specs.  Dew Point, Deg F is defined on page 63 under Running Conditions specs. See page 91 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Know Relative Humidity 
Your choice here will determine which specs are enabled in this menu. 
Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the relative humidity measurement was made.  For example, if the weather service or weather report gives a relative humidity of 56 % and a temperature of 68 degrees, use 68 for the Outside Air Temp.  If you chose No for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
Outside Rel Humidity, % 
Is the air's relative humidity as reported by a weather service or 

measured by humidity instruments.  If you chose No for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken.  The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp.  If you chose Yes for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
Wet Bulb, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  Relative humidity or dew point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart.  The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. If you chose Yes for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.10 Examples 
Many of the specs which the Engine Analyzer uses to predict performance are difficult for some users to get.  For that reason, the program comes with sets of Example specs which the user can load in automatically and easily. 
Check Appendix 5 and 6 for many new features added in std and Plus version of v3.2 and v3.4. 
At the top of most component sections of the Engine Analyzer’s menus, you will find a description of the “Type” of component used.  In Figure 2.44 the component section is the Manifold Specs in the Intake Specs menu.  This combo box can contain several choices: 
• Typical Manifold Types 
Figure 2.44 Using Component Examples
• 
Use Specs Below 

• 
Pick An Example 

• 
Ex: SB Ford Torquer II (or some other name of a specific example) 


Figure 2.44 shows that the current Manifold specs are those picked from the Engine Analyzer’s Example specs for a SB Ford Torquer II manifold.  This name can be a handy reminder of the type of Manifold you are simulating, and also where you got these specs. 


If you are curretly using a set of Example specs, the name of the Example will appear here. You can also click on this combo box to pick a new example or switch the Type to ‘Use Specs Below’.  Specs for the Example are displayed in blue (or hidden completely if you are in Beginner mode). 
Should you decide to change any of the Example’s specs (from Manifold Type to Intake Heat shown here), the name of the Example will be changed to simply ‘Use Specs Below’. 
Click on the Get Example button Click here to save the current specs(or on the Type combo box and as an Example with a name of yourselect Pick an Example) to bring choosing. (Not available if theup a list of example specs. 
current specs are already an Example.) 

There are 2 general ways to pick an example component.  You can either select the Pick An Example from the Type combo box or click on the Get Example button at the bottom of the menu.  You may be first presented with a list of general categories of component examples, like shown in Figure 2.45.  (This screen would not appear for picking Short Block, Heads or Cams because there are no other component examples available at these menus.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

Eventually you will obtain a list of examples, like shown in Figure 2.37.  Here you can select your choice by either clicking on it, then clicking on the Pick button, or double clicking on it.  (By single clicking on an example you have saved (not one provided by Performance Trends) you can click on Delete to delete it.)   

Next you will be shown a comparison of the example you chose and the current specs, as shown in Figure 2.47.  (By clicking on Preferences in the menu bar at the top of the Main Screen, you can omit showing this comparison screen, which you may find annoying. See page 14.) Click on Load In These Example Specs to use these specs.  You will then be given a notice about how these specs can not describe all details of the example just chosen, and you should still use your own judgment about the results.  See Figure 2.48. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

You have the option of changing the Example specs.  For example, lets say you have blocked the crossover to your Torquer II and eliminated all coolant flow which could heat the intake.  You can click on Intake Heat and select No Heat from the choices.  The program will warn you that by changing this spec, the name of the example will no longer be for a Torquer II, but will be changed to the general “Use Specs Below”. 
Saving Examples 
You also have the option of saving your own sets of specs to the list of Component Examples.  If the current specs are not an example, click on the Save Example button to be presented with the screen of Figure 2.49.  (This button is not shown and saving is not possible in Beginner User mode.  See Preferences on page 13.) 
This first screen lets you choose a category under which to save the example.  For example, you may want a category called VW (as shown in Figure 2.49) where you would save Volkswagen manifolds.  Categories lets you easily organize large numbers of examples.  To choose a category, simply click on one of the categories on the right side of the screen, under Examples Added by User.  (Note that you can not add examples to examples provided by Performance Trends on the left side.)  Then click on Use Category to save the 

example to that category.  You will then advance to a screen like Figure 2.50. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.50 Saving an Example 

Enter most any name up to the number of letters this box allows (different number of letters for different components). 
Saving option not available in Beginner User Mode 
If this is the first example you are saving, you will first have to add a new category.  Simply type in a category name in the text input box New Category Name, then click on the Add New Category Name to List button.  You can also Rename or Delete a category by first clicking on the category you want to change.  Then click on the Rename or Delete button. 
Notes: 
• 
Not all specs have Examples available and some Example categories have very few examples from which to choose.  These features will expand with later updates. 

• 
The specs in these Examples are approximate.  Different pieces of hardware and later designs may have different specs, producing very different results.  You will be more accurate if you use your own figures from your own tests, or the latest information from the manufacturer. 

• 
No checks are made to see if your combination of Examples is physically possible.  You can choose to put small block Ford Torquer II intake on a 5 HP Briggs & Stratton short block with a big block Chevy cylinder head.  This may be an interesting "what if", but you must realize this hardware will NOT bolt together. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Chapter 3 Output 
The Engine Analyzer provides several ways to view and output the test results, including: 
• 
Tabular, calculated Test Results displayed on the screen.  Check Section 2.7 for definitions. 

• 
Analysis Report giving tips, warning of safety issues, etc. 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output of reports or graphs 

• 
Engine Library for recording sets of Engine specs for later use 

• 
History Log 

• 
Send Power Curve to another program 


Check Appendix 5 and 6 for new features added in std and Plus versions 3.2 and 3.4. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



3.1 Analysis Reports 
When calculated performance results are displayed on the screen, you can obtain the Analysis Options menu by clicking on Analyze in the menu bar.  See Figure 3.3. 
The Analysis report consists of 2-5 pages of suggestions for improving performance, safety warnings, etc. concerning the performance results calculated. See Figure 3.4 for a screen report. 

IMPORTANT: The Engine Analyzer can NOT anticipate all UNSAFE and poor performing situations.  Do NOT rely only on the Analysis report to point out problems and SAFETY HAZARDS. You must use your own judgment and expert advice by experienced engine builders and the manufacturer of the engine components.  
Short Form 
Check this Option box if you feel very comfortable with running the Engine Analyzer and understanding its output.  If you do not check this option you will obtain the full report which gives additional tips on changing the Engine Analyzer inputs to obtain the desired performance level. 
Desired HP Peak RPM 
Enter the RPM where you would like this engine's HP to peak.  The Analysis report will give suggestions for specifications to produce good performance at this RPM. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Application 
Click this combo box for the following choices: 
Mild Street  An engine driven primarily on the street.  It must idle well, run a low RPM, and have a full exhaust system.  
Street/Strip  An engine designed for occasional racing but must be durable and driven on the street.  
Full Race  An engine designed for racing only. Since there are several classes of racing, from circle track "claimer" and "restricted" classes to Formula 1, the Analysis report does not get extremely specific.  

When calculated test results are displayed on the screen, you can obtain an Analysis Report by clicking on Analyze in the menu bar.  The Analysis report consists of 1-3 pages of suggestions for improving performance, safety warnings, etc. concerning the performance results calculated. See Figure 3.3 and 3.4 for examples. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.2 ASCII Data Files 
Check Appendix 5 and 6 for new features added in std and Plus versions 3.2 and 3.4. 
You may want to use the results from the Engine Analyzer in other software packages.  This could be for additional plot capabilities, statistical analysis, data basing, etc.  Click on File, then select the Save Current Test Results  to ASCII File to write the results to an ASCII file with a name of your choosing.  This command is possible any time tabular, calculated results are displayed on the screen. 
You can only save the RPM data test results for the results currently displayed on the Test Results screen. This consists of the RPM, Brk Tq, Brake HP, etc. 
Comma Separated 
Check this box if you want commas separating the data, leave unchecked and the data is separated by spaces. 
Include Text 
Check this box if you want the titles of the data included in the file, leave unchecked and no titles are included.  Some software packages want only numbers in the files they read.  (Lifter Pump Up or Valve Toss is also converted to numbers from 0=None to 3=Severe if you leave Include Text unchecked.) 
Convert to Columns 
Check this box if you want the data which appears in rows in the Engine Analyzer to appear in columns, like columns of RPM, Brk Tq, etc. Leave it unchecked and the data appears in rows much as in the program and on its printouts. 
File Name 
Enter the full path and file name to store the file.  If you enter no path, the program will store the file in the Engine Analyzer directory (folder). 
Appendix 7 shows new option added in v3.4 B to export the data as a Microsoft Excel file 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


Check Appendix 5, 6, and 7 for new features added in std
3.3 Graphs 
and Plus versions 3.2, 3.4 A and 3.4 B. 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph button or the Graph name in the menu bar as shown in Figure 3.1.  Figure 3.6 shows a typical graph and a descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 
Figure 3.6 Basic Graph Screen Items 
Command buttons perform action as pictured with 1 click of mouse. Menu bar provides for several graph commands and options. Commands to the right of the “|” provide a short cut to commonly used commands. 
Graph Title: change by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/Legend. 
‘Short cut’ commands appear to the right of this bar. Name of current Engine File 
Graph Legend, which describes the data graphed. This includes Name of test results, Type of Data. You can also click on Data Type names and the corresponding data line will flash. This is useful to find a particular line when several are graphed. Names in the Legend can be changed by clicking on Format, then Edit Titles/ Legend. 


Horizontal X axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily changed as described in this section. Grid lines. The style or elimination of grid lines can be changed by 

Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can be 
changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 
Vertical Y axis, the scaling of which can be changed as described in this section. 
There are 2 basic types of test data which can be graphed: 
• 
Brk Torque and Brake HP vs RPM. 

• 
Valve Lift vs crank degrees. 


There are 3 basic types of tests which can be graphed: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results whose RPM data is displayed when at the Test Results screen, for the current Engine specs. 

• 
Last test results. These are the test results from the previous calculation.  By comparing the current calculated results to the last results, you can easily watch how each engine modification has effected performance. 

• 
Test results from the History Log. The History Log is a list of 25 tests, some of which you have specified you want saved long term, some of which are simply some of the last tests you have run.  


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Tq and HP Data vs Valve Lift Data 
You can switch between Tq and HP Data and Valve Lift Data 2 basic ways as shown in Figure 3.7. 
Figure 3.7 Switching between Tq and HP Data and Valve Lift Data 
Click on these buttons to switch between Tq and 
HP Data and Valve Lift Data as pictured. 
Click on the “CAM-tq/hp” menu item. Whichever data type “CAM” or “TQ/HP” is given in upper case letters is the data type currently being used. In this case shown, clicking on “CAM-tq/hp” will switch the graph from the current Valve Lift data type to the TQ/HP data type. 

Graphing Current, Last and History Log Test Results 
The Current and Last Test Results were defined earlier.  The History Log is explained in some detail in Section 3.7 starting on page 143. This section will explain how to graph test results for tests in the History Log. 
Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 

• 
Miscellaneous Format Options to change the appearance of the graph. 


These are discussed in this next section. 
Figure 3.8 History Log (see Section 3.7 for more details) 
Click on the History Button or the History menu item todisplay the History Log. 


Click in this column to show Yes or remove Yes.  Tests marked Yes will be graphed. This column shows name program will display in graph Legend for this test. Click on name to change it. 

Choose a ‘Graph’ option from the menu bar to close the Histroy Log and graph the tests identified by the menu option you pick. Click and drag slide bar to display entire History Log. Some tests marked Yes may be at the bottom of the Log and not be visible now. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Printing 
Figure 3.9 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  It also shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup. 

Figure 3.9 Printing Graphs 
Clicking on the Printer button is the same as clicking on File and then Print. 
Click on File to display the 
two print menu options 
Click here to print the graph. 
Click here to change the printer or printer driver, page orientation, etc. as shown below. 

Windows standard Printer Setup menu 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places.  See Figure 3.10 for explaining the use of the cursor. 


Figure 3.10 Cursor Features and Commands Click here to turn Cursor On 
Click here to turn Cursor Off Cursor line, 
usually pink or Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or 
green, right. Hold down the <shift key> while clicking
depending on these buttons and the cursor moves farther. 
background You can also enable the cursor by clicking onl View, then Turn Cursor On. 

The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 
Note for RPM Data: If the RPM where the cursor is at was not run for a particualr test, no value is given here. For example: One test ran 2000, 2500, 3000 RPM and another ran 2000, 2400, 2800. When cursor is at 2500 RPM, value is given for first test but not given for 2nd test.
The X value of the cursor is shown 
here, in this case the RPM of 2250. 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph line at a data point. This also provides a quick way to move the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) If you click on a graph line in between data points, the cursor will not appear. A data point is where you see a definite point or bend in a graph line. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Changing titles and legend names 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure 3.11 which will allow you to do this. 
Figure 3.11 Menu to Edit Title and Legend 
This is the list of Standard names the program uses unless you click on the Use New Titles button below. Select (click on) a Standard name you want to change. The Standard Name appears in the edit box, along with the current New name if there is one. Once you have selected a name from this list (that row will be highlighted) it is easier to use the up and down arrow keys to select the next item to edit than clicking the item with the mouse. 
This is the list of New names the program will use if you click on Use New Titles.  If a title in the List of New Names is blank, the program will use the Standard name. 

Standard name from 
row selected. 
New name for you to edit. Other options include clicking on the Copy Std Name to New or Blank Out New Name buttons. 
Click here to close this menu and use the New names you have entered. Where New names have been left blank, the Standard name will be used. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph.  The Engine Analyzer has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures 3.12 and 3.13. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.13 Menu to Specify Graph Axes Scales 
This menu can be obtained 2 ways. You can click on View in the menu bar then Specify Scales (axes), or click on the Set Scales button, the right most button on the screen.  See Figure 3.12. 


The current scale limits are loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. 

Click on OK to have the graph redrawn to these new scale limits . 
Format Options 
Click on the Format menu item to be presented with several options which will be briefly discussed here. 
Line Style 
Figure 3.14 Format Options Grid Style 
Click on Line Style to change the thickness of the graph lines. 
Click on Grid Style to change or omit the drawing of grid lines on the graph. 
Back Color 

Click on Back Color to change the background color of the graph from white, black or gray. 
Axes 
Click on Axes to either add or remove labels like TDC and BDC to the X axis for Valve Lift Graphs. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


3.4 Engine Library 
The Engine Analyzer allows you to save a set of Engine specifications to the Engine Library under a name of your choosing.  You can then open these Engines out of the Engine Library in the future for comparison or modification.  The Open window is shown on the next page with explanations. 
Figure 3.15 Engine Library Options Click on Open button (or ‘File (engine)’, then ‘Open’) to display Engine Library shown here. (Save option also available after clicking on ‘File (engine)’.) 
Click on Save button to save current Engines specs to Library 

Total # Engines in Library Name of chosen Engine (currently highlighted in Engine List) 
Preview of Engine chosen 
Click and drag slide bar to view all engines in list 
Single click on engine to choose it for preview. Double click to immediately open it. 
Click here to 
Click here to bring up standardopen the 
Windows File Manager window tochosen Engine 
access any disk drive or directory Click here to delete (folder). Not avaialbe in Beginner chosen Engine. User Mode. 
Click here to close the Engine Library with No changes 
Click here to bring up on screen help. 
See Appendix 7 to show the latest v3.4B sends files to the Recycle Bin when they are deleted.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Open an Engine File 
To open an Engine file saved in the Library, either: 
• 
Click on the Open button 

• 
Click on the “File (Engine)” menu item and then on the “Open Engine” options from the list. 


You will obtain the window shown on the previous page.  Single click on one of the Engines in the list, or click and drag the slide button on the right side of the list to display more Engines.  Once you single click on an Engine, it is now the Chosen Engine File and a preview of the Engine is given in the Preview section.  If the file you chose was not a valid Engine Analyzer file, the program will tell you so and you can not choose it. 
Once an Engine has been chosen, you can delete it by clicking on the Delete button, or Open it by clicking on the Open button in this window.  You can also click on a different Engine to Preview it or close this window and return to the Main Screen without choosing a new Engine file. 
If you are sure of the Engine you want to open, you can simply double click on it from the Engine List.  This opens the Engine without a preview and closes this menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.17 Saving Engine File Options 
Click on File (engine) menu item, then Save (engine) or click on the Save to Engine Library button to bring up this Save menu. 
Click here to save specs to New Engine name shown 
New name to save vehicle specs to. Leave unchanged and click OK to save to the current vehicle name. Click on name in box to and start typing to change it, then click OK to save it to the new name. 
Name of current vehicle file you are working with 
Click here to bring up standard Windows File Manager window to access any disk drive or directory (folder). Not avaialbe in Beginner User Mode. 

Save an Engine File 
Before we discuss saving an engine file, it is important for you to understand how the program opens and uses Engine files.  When you open an Engine from the Engine Library, you are only using a copy of the Engine.  The original Engine file is kept in the library.   
As you make changes to the Engine, they are only made to this copy.  The original file is not changed.  If you want to delete your changes, you can simply open a fresh, unchanged copy of the original Engine file from the Library.  If you want to keep your changes, you must save them. This can be done by clicking on the Save button.  You are also asked if you want to save your changes whenever you open  a new Engine, and the program has detected you have made changes to the current file. 
To save a Engine File, you will be presented with the Save Window as shown on the previous page.  The program suggests a new Engine name which is the same as the current Engine name shown at the top of the Main Screen.  If you want to save your changes to the same name, simply click on OK.  This will update the current Engine file with your latest changes. 
If you want to save the current set of Engine specs with your changes to a new name (and leave the current Engine file in the Library unchanged), then click on the suggested file name and modify it as you want.  For example, in the window shown on the previous page, you may want to add -2 to the current name 302-4V to create 302-4V-2 to indicate this is the 2nd revision of 302-4V.  This is the safest way to make changes, because you can always return to an earlier version and see what you had done. 
Certain engine names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names with more than 50 characters. 

• 
Names which include certain special characters If you enter a name which is outside of these limits, the program will warn you and/or make the correction automatically. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Engine files are saved in the ENGDAT subdirectory in the EA30 subdirectory under PERFTRNS.PTI directory. You can copy Windows Engine Analyzer files from programs on other computers to this directory and they will be found by the program.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.5 Printer Output 
The Engine Analyzer can print the tabular test results for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer button.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.18 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the top for boxes.  All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 
Check Appendix 5 and 6 for new features added in std and Plus versions 3.2 and 3.4. 
Include Engine Specs 
Figure 3.18 Printer Command and Menu of Printer Output Options The Windows Printer Setup option lets you choose the printer or printer driver being used by Windows and also the page orientation. 
Click on Print or the Printer Button for the Printout Options menu shown to the right. 


Select this options if you want all the current Engine specs, Transmission specs, etc printed with the results.  This will add 1 page to the printed report. 
Include Engine Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the complete Engine printed with the results. 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular report you send to the printer.  These "report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like modifications, weather conditions, etc. 
Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment 
Select this option if you  are using a dot matrix printer or a printer with fewer fonts and font sizes available.  This option usually shrinks the fonts and margins some to correct a problem of the printout going beyond the margin on the right side. 
Other Printout Types 
Print Blank Worksheet 
Click on this button to produce a list of engine specs with blank lines next to them.  These "worksheets" are handy for gathering engine specs when creating new engines with the Engine Analyzer.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Print Help Definitions 
Click on this button to produce a list of output parameters with a 1 line definition.  These definitions are the same as when you click on an item in the  RPM Data section or Special Calculations section of the Test Results 
Print History 
Click on this button to print all 25 lines of the History Log.  Note that the History Log prints better when the printer is in Landscape mode.  Click on the Windows Printer Setup menu item shown in Figure 3.18 for switching to landscape mode. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.6 History Log 
The Engine Analyzer remembers the results and the Engine specs which produced those results for up to the last 25 runs you have made.  This can be a very handy comparison of one run to another and saves you the trouble of making notes on pieces of paper. It is also handy to be able to go back to some condition which gave very good performance, but you don’t remember why or what the specs were. Figure 3.19 shows the History Log  and options.  

Test Title 

Click on Test Title and you are asked if you want to retrieve the specs which produced these results. Answer Yes and the specs are retrieved.  Answer No and you can then change the Test Title.  This is useful for making notes about this particular run, modifications you made, etc. 
Graph? 
Click in this column to have a Yes inserted or removed.  All test rows with a 
the Graph screen. See Figure 3.20. 
Graph Title 
Is the title which will appear in the graph legend for this test.  The program creates a simple title based on the Engine File Name and the time the test was run, but you can click on this name and the program will ask you to enter a new name, perhaps something like “34 in Headers”. This column is only visible in the History Log displayed in the Graph screen.  See Figure 3.20.  The first time  you  type in a Test Title, the Graph Title will be changed to the first 16 letters of the Test Title. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Save? 
Click in this column to have a Yes inserted or removed.  All tests move toward the bottom of the log as new tests are run, and eventually fall off the list.  However, tests with a Yes move to the bottom, but do not fall off the list and are saved on the list until you remove the Yes in this column.   
Tip:  If you want to save a test, but do not necessarily want it on the History Log,, click on it to retrieve it and the engine specs which produced it.  At the Main Screen, make notes of what this test and engine are.  Then save it to the Engine Library.  Although the test results are not available for graphing, you can open this engine file and recalculate the test results at any time in the future. 
Peak Tq 
Is the peak torque for this particular test, and the RPM at which it occurs. 
Incr. 
Is the increase in Peak Tq for this test compared to the test below it, usually the previous test run.  If Peak Tq dropped, the Incr. will be negative. 
Avg Tq 
Is the average torque for all RPMs run for this particular test.  If the RPM range is different for 2 different tests, comparing averages can be misleading.  For example, run the same engine, first from 2000-6000 RPM, then from 3000-7000 RPM.  You most likely will get 2 different Avg Tqs, but probably get the same Peak Tq. 
Incr. 
Is the increase in Avg Tq for this test compared to the test below it, usually the previous test run.  If Avg Tq dropped, the Incr. will be negative. 
Peak HP Incr. Avg HP Incr. 
These columns are the same as the torque columns, except these track the changes in Peak HP and Avg HP. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.7 Send to Vehicle Program 
The Engine Analyzer allows you to load engine performance curves into another Windows Performance Trends vehicle program, like Drag Racing Analyzer v3.0. This is accomplished by clicking on the Send button to SendToVehProgram menu item when the Test Results are displayed.  You will first be presented with a menu of options as shown in Figure 3.22. 
The process of loading Engine Analyzer results into another 
Figure 3.22 Send To Vehicle Program Menu
program are nearly automatic and consists of: 
1. Select the vehicle program you want to send the 

Click on “dot” 
results to in the Send menu.  See Figure 3.22.  Then 
to select 
click on OK/Send to leave the Engine Analyzer. 
which 
2. The vehicle program will be automatically loaded and 
program to 
run. The Engine Analyzer will look where it expects 
send curve to. 
the program to be.  If the program is not there, the Engine Analyzer will ask you if it should look for it.  See the Troubleshooting section on the next page.  
See Trouble­
shooting
3. Follow instructions in the vehicle program like Drag 
section for 
Racing Analyzer to load in the Engine Analyzer 
using this
power curve, weather conditions which gave this 
“Look for it”
power, etc.  This can be done at any time you are in 
button.
the vehicle program, or not at all. Note that you will 
have to tell the program to load the power curve. 
Loading does not happen automatically, to prevent perhaps overwriting some engine information you wanted to save or compare to the new power curve. Usually you go to the Engine Specs menu in the other program to load the power curve.  
4. When you  click on the Return to Engine Analyzer button in the vehicle program or quit the vehicle program, you will be returned to the Engine Analyzer program.  Now you can make another modification to the engine, send it again into the vehicle program and see how it effects vehicle performance. 
You can jump between the Engine Analyzer and the vehicle program as many times as you want. 
If you are using a Performance Trends vehicle program not listed in the Send menu, and the program says it can receive power curves from an Engine Analyzer program, click on the “Other Custom  Configuration” button.  Fill in the 3 text boxes as instructed in the vehicle program. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Troubleshooting 
If in the process of sending the power curve to another program does not work as you expected: 
• 
Be sure you understand how the process works.  Read steps 1-4 on the previous page. 

• 
You do not have the Windows vehicle program you specified. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer could not find the vehicle program  Click on the Look for It button next to the Vehicle program you want to work with. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer could not find the correct vehicle program if you have more than 1 copy of the program on your computer.  Click on 


Figure 3.23 Look For It Menu Select the Disk Drive to look for the Vehicle 
the Look 
program. Then click on Search button to 
for It
start the search. 
button next to the 
Copies of the appropriate program are 
Vehicle 
displayed here. If you click on Cancel/Halt 
program
(or the program searches the entire drive), 
you want 
and only 1 copy is found, this copy is 
to work 
automatically assumed to be the one you 
with. 
want to send the power curve to. This menu is then closed. 
If more than 1 copy of the program is found (as shown here) you must double click on the program you want to use. This menu then closes. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Chapter 4 Examples 
Each of these examples become progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated. 
The results shown in these examples may be somewhat different than what you obtain with your particular version of the program That is due to minor upgrades in the calculations in later versions. 
Check Appendix 5, 6, and 7 for new features added in std and Plus versions 3.2, 3.4 A and 3.4 B. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.1 “I Don’t Know My Engine’s 
Specs” 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Read the Preliminary "Example To Get You Going" (Section 1.5) 

• 
Moving around in the menus and changing specs (Section 2.0-2.7) 

• 
Calculate Performance (Section 2.8) 

• 
Examples (Section 2.10) 

• 
Graphing Options (Section 3.3) 


Example 4.1 will be fairly simple to get you started. You will answer a fairly 
Figure 4.1 Main Screen Click Preferences to see if Beginner User mode has been selected (has check mark by it) Note here that Beginner is the current mode and is checked 

Click here to show Short Block specs. 
common question “What do I do if I don’t know some particular specs about my engine.”  You will go through a process of building an engine knowing hardly more than the cubic inches and number of cylinders.   
For this example, you will assume you have a 97 Ford Escort ZX2 4 valve, overhead cam (OHC) 2.0L inline 4 cylinder.  Ford rates the engine at 127 ft lbs at 4250 RPM and 130 HP at 5750 RPM. 
1) Start With an Engine Close to Yours from the Engine Library 
First, start the Engine Analyzer program following the procedure in Section 1.4 by either: 
• 
Clicking on the Engine Analyzer v3.0 icon in the Perf. Trends program group (Windows 3.1) 

• 
Clicking on Start, Programs, Perf. Trends, then Engine Analyzer v3.0 (Windows 95) 

• 
Clicking on the EA.EXE (EA) program under the EA30 directory (folder) under the PERFTRNS.PTI directory (folder) using File Manager (Windows Explorer).  (Terms in parentheses are for Windows 95.) 


You will be shown the Engine Analyzer’s Main Screen as shown in Figure 4.1.  Because you are new to the program or new to engines, be sure the program is in Beginner User mode.  Click on Preferences at the top of the Main Screen to see if there is a check mark by Beginner User.  If there is not, click on Beginner User. 
Open up this Engine file by clicking on the Open button as shown in Figure 4.2.  Move through the list, clicking on engines which look similar to your Ford 2.0L.  You will be shown a preview or summary of the engine.  Unfortunately, there are no similar 4 cylinder engines, so you will use whatever engine was loaded in the program when you started it.  The name of this engine is shown at the top of the Main Screen as shown in Figure 4.2. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.2 Engine Library 

Name of Engine the program is currently working with. The current specs may have been changed and be different than the Engine in Library of the same name. 
Click on the engine you want to Open to see a Preview. Double click to Open immediately. 
Preview of chosen (highlighted) engine 
Click here to show 
Engine Library 
2) Pick Typical Example Specs, Starting with Short Block 
The Engine Analyzer has “Typical” example specs loaded in for you to pick from.  These specs may not exactly match your engine, but are close enough to let you use the program. 
Start the engine buildup process by clicking on the Short Block specs button, as shown in Figure 4.1.  You will see specs which are for the current engine.  Figure 4.3 shows there are usually 2 ways to pick Typical Example specs for your 2.0L: 
1. 
Click on the Get Example button at the bottom of the Short Block menu 

2. 
Click on the down arrow button on the Type spec at the top of the Short Block menu, then choose the Pick an Example choice. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Either way, you will be presented with a list of Short Block Categories as shown in Figure 4.5.  You may also be shown one of the several Tips messages in the Engine Analyzer, giving you info helpful if you are not familiar with the program, as shown in Figure 4.4.  Simply click on OK to clear the message.  Note that this message will be shown again the next time you start the program.  However, if you do not want to see this reminder again, click on the Don’t Show This Again box, then on OK and you won’t see this tip again, even if you restart the program. 

Figure 4.5 Picking a Short Block Category 

Click on Typical Short Blocks to highlight the category, then click on the Use Category button below. 
You can also pick in one step by double clicking on Typical Short Blocks. 
Figure 4.6 Picking the Correct Typical Short Block Click on your choice to highlight it 

Then click on Pick to pick that Short Block 
Click on Print to print the entire list of these examples 
Pick (click on) the Typical Short Blocks to highlight it, then click on the Use Category button.  You will get a list of Typical Short Blocks, listed by size in Liters or cubic inches, and number of cylinders.  Find the 2.0L 4 cylinder engine, click on it to highlight it, then click on the Pick button to choose it. You will be returned to the Short Block menu with these specs loaded. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

You will probably receive 2 more tips as shown in Figures 4.7 and 4.8.  Figure 4.7 explains that these specs are approximate and that there are other things which can effect performance and durability other than what is described by these few specs.  Figure 4.8 is letting you know that many of the specs you have picked for this Short Block will be hidden when you are returned to the Short Block specs menu.  This is our attempt to avoid confusing or overwhelming the Beginner User with numbers and names they are not familiar with.  The Short Block menu will now look like Figure 4.9. 

All specs have been hidden except Accessories, which are set to “No accessories, no fan, no water  pump”.  Click on the down arrow for this combo box, and select the “1990s prod engine in vehicle, all accessories”, which should be typical of your 2.0L as it is installed in your car. On an engine dynamometer, the accessories would be much less, like “No accessories, no fan, no water  pump” and performance would improve.  That is one reason dynamometer tests usually show higher power than what the engine actually does in the vehicle. 
Figure 4.9 Short Block Menu with Typical 2.0L 4 Cyl. Example Specs Loaded 
Click on the OK 

Notice that most 
button to close the 
specs have been
Short Block menu 
hidden, to avoid
and return to the 
confusing the
Main Screen. 
Beginner User. However, Accessories is visible and can be adjusted to match your application, for example full vehicle accessories or minimum dynamometer accessories. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
3) Continue Picking Typical Example Specs for Other Parts 
Head(s) 
Click on the Head(s) button to open the Head(s) menu.  Click on the Get Example button or select the Pick an Example Type to open the categories of Head Examples.  You do know that your ZX2 2.0L is a 4 valve OHC engine, so select the category of Typ Large 4 Valve Heads. The Typical heads are listed for various sizes of cylinder bore, because the larger the bore, the larger the valves which can be fit within the bore.  You noticed in the Short Block menu shown in Figure 4.9 that the bore for the Typical 2.0L Short Block was shown as 3.52 inches.  Therefore, select the “Typ Stock 4vlv, 3.5” Bore” head. 
Notice that this example is contained on 2 lines, because there are so many specs.  The second row contains the specs for the exhaust port.  When you are returned to the Head(s) menu, you will notice that all specs are now hidden, except Compression Ratio.  Compression Ratio has been loaded with a 9, but you know  from magazine articles that this engine has a 9.6 Compression Ratio. Therefore, click on the 9 and change it to 9.6. 
Figure 4.10 Picking a Typical Head for the 2.0L 4 Valve ZX2
Click on the OK button to close the Heads 

Click on
menu and return to the 
either row to
Main Screen. 
pick this example for a 3.5” bore. Note that only 1 row is highlighted, but the specs in both rows will be used. 
Figure 4.11 Picking a Typical EFI Intake Manifold for the 2.0L 
Intake System 
Click on Intake System to open the menu shown in Figure 4.11.  The Intake System is divided into 2 parts, the manifold specs on the left side and the carburetor or throttle body specs on the right side. 

Click on the Manifold Type combo box, then select “Typical Production Long Runner EFI”. There is no need to pick from a list of Examples, as the program calculates runners to match the Head’s ports. 
Typical Intake Manifolds are not picked as an Example, but simply by picking the appropriate Type from the Type combo box shown in Figure 4.11. 
Select the Typical Prod. Long Runner EFI as the Manifold Type and all the Manifold specs are hidden.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Then click on the Throttle Body Type on the right side and select “Fuel Injection Throttle Bodies” for the Category.  Then select “Typical Prod 4 Cyl ThrtBody” as the example component from the top of the list.  When you are returned to the Intake System menu, all specs have now been hidden except the Manifold Type and Throttle Body Type. Click on the OK button to close the Intake System menu and return to the Main Screen. 
You could have also clicked on the Get Example button to pick the Throttle Body Category, but then you would have gotten the screen of Figure 4.12.  If you clicked on Carbs/Throttle Bodies the process would then be the same as described above.  Its just that if you click on the Type combo box to Pick an Example, the program already knows what component (manifold or throttle body) you want to pick and you save a step. 

Exhaust System 
Click on Exhaust System to open the Exhaust System menu.  Like the Intake System, the Exhaust System is divided into 2 parts, the manifold/header on the left side and the exhaust system/mufflers on the right side. 
Unlike the Intake Manifold, you  must pick a Typical Example by clicking on the Type button, then pick the Example Category of Typical Exh Manifolds.  You have looked at your exhaust manifold and you see it is made up of several short tubes, similar to a header, so you pick the Example of “Typical Prod ‘Shorty’ Headers”. 
Then pick an Example Exhaust System by clicking on the Type button, then pick the Example Category of “Street Exhaust Systems”, then pick the Example of “Typical Prod HiPerf 4 cyl Exh”.  Like the Intake System, when you are returned to the Exhaust System menu, all specs have now been hidden except the Manifold Type and Exhaust System Type. Click on the OK button to close the Exhaust System menu and return to the Main Screen. 
Cam/Valve Train 
Click on Cam/Valve Train to open the Cam/Valve Train menu.  Like the other menus, click on Type at  the top or the Get Example button to open up the Categories of Cam/Valve Train Examples.  Pick the “Typical Cams” Category, and then pick the “Typical Stock OHC” example because you do know that the engine is overhead cam (OHC).  Like the other menus, when you are returned to the Cam/Valve Train menu, most all specs have now been hidden. Click on the OK button to close the Cam/Valve Train menu and return to the Main Screen. 
Supercharger 
The 2.0L is not supercharged, and the Engine Summary at the Main Screen shows that currently there is  “No Turbo or Supercharger” installed.  If you wanted, you could click on Supercharger button and confirm that the Type is set to “No Turbo or Supercharger”. 
Running Conditions 
Click on the Running Conditions button and you will now be shown the conditions under which the test will be run.  Since you are trying to match Ford’s advertised results, choose “Std SAE Conditions” for the Weather Conditions.  You are not sure of the Coolant Temp, so leave it where its at for the current engine file, probably something between 165 to 195 degrees.  Be sure no Nitrous Oxide system is on, so choose No Nitrous Injection.  Choose Gas for the Fuel and an Octane of 87, the minimum octane which the factories design their cars for (or what ever octane gasoline you typically buy). 
For RPMs to Run, use 2500 for the Starting RPM, 10 for the Number of RPMs and 500 for the RPM Increment.  The RPM Preview shows “2500, 3000, 3500 ... 7000” which includes the advertised Torque Peak and HP Peak RPMs of 4250 and 5750 with a good RPM range both above and below these RPMs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
You can forget the Starting Point ‘Suggestions’ specs at this time because they are for more advanced work, when you are trying to obtain suggestions for sizing cams or runners for optimum performance.  See Example 4.5. 
Note:  You may say that the Coolant Temp and Fuel Octane inputs suggested here would be complete guesses on your part.  In cases like that where you are not sure of specs, calculate performance with a guess at the specs, then calculate performance again with a significantly different guess.  If performance does not change much, that particular spec must not be that important for your particular combination, so either guess is adequate.  If it does show a big effect, then you will have to read the section of the manual which discusses it to come up with a better estimate of the  real value. 
4) Save Your New Engine 
You are probably anxious to run your engine and see its results, but first change the Engine Comments to reflect the changes you’ve made.  Click in the Comments box at the Main Screen.  Change the comments the same as you would for most any Windows text editing or word processing program.  See Figure 4.13.  Remember that these comments should help remind you of what this engine is, even several years in the future. 
Figure 4.13 Change the Comments at the Main Screen Click anywhere in this box and use Delete or Backspace keys to delete old comments. Then type in most any new comments. 

When you are satisfied with your comments, then save this new engine you’ve created to the Engine Library.  Click on  “Save to Engine Library” at the top of the Main Screen.  You are asked the question shown in Figure 4.14 if you want to save these new specs to the same file name, currently at the top of the Main Screen. Since these specs are now completely different than the engine you started with, click on No. 
The program will present the screen of Figure 4.15.  Here you can type in a new name for your engine, then click on OK to save the engine. Remember that a name can not have spaces or certain characters. See Section 3.4.  The program may modify your name or warn you if you use a wrong character. 

After you have saved the name, you can click on Engine Library and go through the list of engines to find your new engine. 
Figure 4.15 Menu for Entering New Engine Name 

Type in most any name you want, then click on OK. The program may change the name to be acceptable. See Section 3.4. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
5) How’d You Do? 
Now you can calculate 
Figure 4.16 First Test Results for the ZX2 2.0L 
performance and see how you do at matching the factory numbers of 127 ft lbs at 4250 RPM and 130 HP at 5750 RPM. To calculate performance, you can do the following: 
• 
At the Main Screen you can click on the Calculate Performanc e button at the top 

• 
At the Main Screen 


Click on Back (or press <Esc>) to return to the Main Screen 

Summary of Peak and Avg Tq and HP showing peaks of 128 ft lbs and 119 HP. 
Click and drag ‘slide bar’ buttons to view all results in both the RPM Data section (top) and Special Calculations Section (bottom). 
press the <F2> key 
• At the Main Screen click on Running Conditions, then click on Calculate Performance in this menu. 
The program first checks your inputs to be sure there are no obvious problems, things like valve sizes being too big to fit into the bore size, etc. If no problems are noticed, calculations will proceed and you will obtain the results screen shown in Figure 4.16.  You may initially be given some Engine Analyzer Tips as shown in Figure 4.4, page 153.  Read them and then click on OK. 
Figure 4.17 Portion of Test Results for ZX2 with Typical Stock HO OHC Cam 

The performance summary in the upper right corner of Figure 4.16 shows peaks of 128 ft lbs and 119 HP.  These are very close to the factory ratings of 127 ft lbs and 130 HP, especially considering you knew almost nothing about the engine.  These results would probably be close enough for you to now make modifications on to see what helps or hurts performance.  If some modification showed a 5 HP gain, you could be reasonable sure your engine should show about a 5 HP gain, even though the predicted HP may be about 10 HP low. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
6) Fine Tuning
The Engine Analyzer’s torque is about right, the HP is low and the RPMs where both peak (3000 and 3500 for torque, and 5500 for HP) are lower than the factory rating.  You may not know this now, but most modifications which improve air flow or performance will increase HP more than torque and will shift the peak RPMs to a higher RPM.  It looks like some components with “improved breathing” would help the program match the factory ratings. You may have noticed when you picked several of the Typical example components, there was a higher performance example available. For example, there was a Typical Stock HO OHC cam available instead of just the Typical Stock OHC cam. Try installing  the HO cam and see the effect. 
Click on Back in the 
Figure 4.18 Graph of Test Results from Figure 4.17 
upper left corner of the test results screen, then click on Cam/Valve Train to open that menu.  Just as you did before, click on Type at the top, then “Pick an Example”, then choose the “Typical Cams Category”, then “Typical Stock HO OHC” example.  Calculate performance again to obtain results as shown in Figure 
4.17. It shows closer agreement to the factory ratings, now being only 6 HP low. 
Click on the Graph button or the Graph menu command shown in Figure 4.17 to display a graph  of the test results, as shown in Figure 4.18.  Figure 4.18 also shows how you can change the graph to appear like 

Figure 4.19 or 4.20.  (In “Experienced User” mode, there are even more options.  See Preferences on page 13, 14.) 
Figure 4.19 shows a comparison of the Typical Stock HO OHC cam to the Typical Stock OHC cam.  You can see the HO cam continually shows more torque and HP as RPM increases, and the HP peaks at a higher RPM, just as you though it would. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.20 compares the valve lift for the 2 cams.  As you would think, the Typical HO cam shows more lift, more duration and more “area under the curve”. 
You could try some other higher performance Example components, say “Typical Ported Stock 4 Valve” heads, or a “Typical Aftermarket EFI” intake manifold to get the power closer to 130 HP. However being within 1 ft lb and 6 HP is about as good as you should expect to get, without actual measurements.   

Click on Back at the Graph Screen, then Back at the Test Results screen to return to the Main Screen. 
7) Save Your Changes 
At the Main Screen, you might want to change the comments to mention using the Typical Stock HO cam.  Then Save the engine with the HO cam by clicking on the Save to Engine Library button.  Answer Yes to the question of Figure 4.21 to update the current engine “MY-ZX2-2.0L” with the HO cam. 

Conclusions 
• 
The Engine Analyzer provides even a beginner with enough example parts to build their engine 

• 
The Engine Analyzer can match the performance of real engines quite well 

• 
The Engine Analyzer provides ways to analyze and compare results with graphs. 

• 
You can save your engine to the Engine Library with descriptive comments, for recall in the future. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.2 Installing Hydraulic And Solid Lifter Camshafts 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Using Calculation Menu for cam specs (Section 2.9.9) 

• 
Graphing Options (Section 3.3) 

• 
Evaluating Valve Flow & Cam Calculations and General Engine Calculation in the Special Calculations results (Section 2.8.2) 

• 
History Log (Section 3.6) 


More than any other single engine modification, the camshaft determines the engine's "personality", from a low speed "stump puller" to a high revving, Formula 1 winner.  Then it's no surprise that a great deal of the Engine Analyzer's calculations center around the cam profile and timing.  To investigate these calculations you will simulate installing aftermarket solid and hydraulic camshafts. 
Check Appendix 6 for MANY new features to describe the Cam, added in std and Plus version 3.4. 
Get Baseline Performance of Stock Cam 
Because you will get into more detail in this example, be sure to have selected Experienced User in Preferences at the Main Screen.  However, to keep the Cam/Valve Train menu simple, leave “Show Valve Open/Close” unchecked.  (See Figure 4.1 in Example 4.1)  Then, Open a fresh copy of the 302-4V from the Engine Library by clicking on the Engine Library button at the top of the Main 
Screen as shown in Example 4.1, Figure 4.2. 
Calculate Performance so the program’s History Log has a record of how the stock cam performs.  At the Test Results screen, click on View (must be in Experienced User mode), then click on Show History Now.  You will see the History Log appear at the bottom of the screen as shown in Figure 4.23.  You will notice in the left column, a Test Title which the program has given the test consisting of the Engine name and the time and date of the test.  If you click on any Test Title other than the first one, the program will ask if you want to change the Test Title, or retrieve the specs which produced those test results (Figure 4.22).  If you click on the Test Title in the top row, it assumes you want to change or edit the Test Title.  Click on the first Test Title and enter a name like “Stock Cam”. 
Click on “Don’t Show History” at the top of the History Log screen to close it.  Then, in the lower section of results called the Special Calculations take a look at some results.  In particular, note Overlap Area, Total Exh/Int % and Vlv Area in the Valve Flow and Cam Calculations section; Dynamic Comp Ratio, Est Idle Vac and Theo. Crank Comprssn in the General Engine Calculations, and Rec Inertial Len in the ‘Starting Point’ Suggestions section.  See Figure 4.24.  These have been tabulated in Table 4.2 a couple pages ahead, and will be discussed shortly. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.23 Test Results of Stock Cam Showing History Log 
Click on View, 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Run New Hydraulic Cam 
Now "install" 2 different camshafts and check performance.  Listed in Table 4.1 are the catalog specs for the stock cam and 2 cams you have been considering.  You will notice that many cam grinders do not give similar specifications.  Fortunately, the program allows you to input specs in many different ways so the program can make comparisons of these cams very easy. 
Table 4.1 Cam Specs from Catalog  
Catalog Specs  Stock  Hydraulic  Solid  

Profile Type  Hyd Roller  Hyd Roller   Solid Roller  

Intake Specs:  
Recommended Valve Lash  na  na  .026  
Lobe (tappet) Lift  .28  .34  
Duration @ .050" Lift  202  220  
Advertised Duration  264  
Lobe Centerline  116  108  
Valve Lift (1.6 Rocker Ratio)  .448  .592  

Exhaust Specs:  
Recommended Valve Lash  na  na  .028  
Lobe Lift  .28  .34  
Duration @ .050" Lift  202  226  
Advertised Duration  264  
Lobe Centerline  114  110  
Valve Lift (1.6 Rocker Ratio)  .592  

Lobe Separation  115  106  

Click on Back at the Test Results screen to return to the Main Screen.  Click on Cam/Valve Train to open that menu as shown in Figure 4.25.  Now you’ll start changing specs to match the Hydraulic Roller cam in Table 4.1. 
You can leave most of the General Cam Specs at the top of the Cam/Valve Train menu as they are.  The Lift for Rating Events is 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
you would probably be getting all new roller tappets, pushrods, rocker arms and springs, and you would probably change this setting to Pushrod w Rckr Arm (improved).  We’re leaving in the production parts to illustrate some points.] 

inputs.  For that reason, you do now have to know  or enter all inputs.   
Enter .34 for Max Lobe Lift and notice that Intake Gross Valve Lift changes in the lower left section called Calculated Cam Specs.  Leave the Rocker Arm Ratio at 1.6 because you are not changing the rocker arms. 
Next enter the Exhaust numbers of 226 for Duration, 110 for Centerline and .34 for Lobe Lift.  When finished, the menu should like Figure 4.25.  Click on OK to return to the Main Screen, then calculate performance 
As done before, click 
top.  See Figure 4.26.  What this is saying is the program believes this new cam coupled with the production valve train may produce lifter pump up at some of the RPMs tested.  To see which RPMs, click on the slide bar to the right side of the RPM Data results, and slide the button down.  The Lifter Pump Up line is second from the bottom.  See Figure 4.27 (on previous page). 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
  Figure 4.28 Graph of Hydraulic Cam with Stock Cam (last results) 
Click on the Graph button to obtain the graph of Figure 4.28.  The graph more clearly shows that this aftermarket hydraulic cam looses a lot of low RPM torque, with a very small increase in Peak HP. Click on Back to return to the Test Results screen, then Back again to return to the Main Screen. 

Run New Solid Roller Cam 
Return to the Cam/Valve Train menu and start entering specs for the Solid Roller cam in Table 4.1.  There are 3 big difference in the specs for this cam compared to the Stock Cam and the Hydraulic Cam: 
• 
There are no Duration at .050” numbers, just Advertised Duration 

• 
There are no Centerline numbers 

• 
There are no Lobe Lift numbers, just Valve Lift 


Since there are no .050” Durations, click on Rating Lift in the General Cam Specs at the top of the Cam/Valve Train menu and select Seat Timing.  You will notice that the Duration labels are now changed to Advertised Duration, the numbers you have for the Solid Roller. For Lifter (profile) Type, select Agr Solid Roller, since this is an aftermarket (generally aggressive) solid roller camshaft.  Like before, leave Valve Train as Pushrod w Rckr Arm (prod) since you are using the production rocker arms and springs.  (Note that in reality you would probably be getting all new roller tappets, pushrods, rocker arms and springs, and you would probably change this setting to Pushrod w RckrArm (improved).  We’re leaving the production parts to illustrate some points.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Next we’ll start typing in the intake numbers from the catalog (Table 4.1) which you are given. Because the Durations are now labeled Advertised Durations, you can type in the 264s for both the Intake and Exhaust.  For Centerlines, we’ll have to make some assumptions.  You may not know this, but if the cam is installed “Straight Up”, the Lobe Separation is the same as the Lobe Centerlines.  Therefore make this assumptions, and type in 106 for the Intake and Exhaust Lobe Centerlines.  Notice that Total Cam Advance in the General Cam Specs is set to 0 Straight Up, and Lobe Separation in the Calculated Cam Specs is 106 after you type in both centerlines. 
For Tappet Lift, you will have to use the Calculation menu since you only have Valve Lift.  Click on the Clc button next to the Intake Max Lobe Lift and you’ll get the menu shown in Figure 4.29.  Since this is a Small Block Ford, the cam grinder is probably assuming a 1.6 rocker arm ratio, as shown in the list of Figure 4.29, so type in 1.6 for Assumed Rocker Arm Ratio.  (Note that even if you were using ,say, 1.7 rocker arms on the engine, for this calculation you must use the rocker arm ratio the cam grinder used to come up with the advertised valve lift.) Then type in .592 and the Calculation Menu shows a Calc Max Lobe Lift of .37 inches. Click on Use Calc Value to load .37 into Intake Max Lobe Lift at the Cam/Valve Train menu.  Since the Valve Lift and Assumed Rocker Arm Ratio would be the same for the exhaust, you can just type in .37 for the Exhaust Max Lobe Lift.   
Notice that since this is a solid lifter cam, the Intake and Exhaust Lash at Valve are now printed in black and have become enabled (not printed in gray or disabled).  Type in .026 and .028 for the lash numbers.  Your menu should now look like Figure 4.30. 

Click on OK and then Calculate Performance.  Then click on View and Show History Now to obtain the screen of Figure 4.31.  The History Log shows Peak Torque has improved 15 ft lbs over the Hydraulic Cam and 4 ft lbs over the Stock Cam.  However, Peak HP for the Solid Roller Cam is down from either the Hydraulic Cam or Stock Cam. Overall, the Stock Cam looks the best, with the highest Avg Tq and Avg HP numbers. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
In the Notes section at the top of Figure 4.31, notice that the Solid Roller Cam also has Valve Toss at some RPMs, probably because you did not improve the Valve Train with this new, more aggressive cam.  (For hydraulic cams, valve train problems are shown as Lifter Pump-Up and for solid lifters as Valve Toss.) 
Figure 4.31 Test Results and History Log for Solid Roller Cam 

Note Valve Toss in Notes Section. 
Test Summary and History Log both show that the Solid Roller Cam is better for Pk Torque but loses Pk HP. History Log shows Stock Cam appears to be the best for most situations (looking at Avg Tq and HP). 
Click on Test Title and Type in Solid Roller Cam 
Click on  the Graph button to obtain a graph like Figure 4.32, showing the Solid Roller Cam with the Hydraulic Cam (the last test results).  Figure 4.32 also shows the optional vertical “cursor” bar, which you can move left or right.  In the graph legend at the right, the value of each graph line at the cursor bar is displayed.  This lets you “pin point” exact values on the graph for more exact comparisons of  graph lines. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Click on History to display History Log 
Click on a blank space in this column to mark Yes for tests to graph. Click on a Yes to remove it.  First test (current test) is always graphed. 
Name which will appear in graph legend. Click here to change it. 
Click here to graph other tests 
Click here to graph tests kdY 
Graph Options 
With the graphs of Figure 4.32 on the screen, click on History in the Menu Bar.  You will get the History Log as shown in Figure 
4.33. In the “Graph ?” column, click on  Stock Cam and Hydraulic Cam.  Then click on Graph These Tests to produce the graph of Figure 4.34.  This graph  shows that the Solid Roller and the Stock Cam show about the same trends, and the Hydraulic cam looses a lot of low RPM torque but does gain some higher RPM HP. 
Figures 4.34 through 4.37 show some of the graphing options.  Click on the Valve Lift Graph button, or Format and then Valve Lift vs Crank Degrees, or the cam-TqHP menu command to produce the Valve Lift graph shown in Figure 4.35.  Here you can compare the actual cam profiles for the 3 cams.  Notice that the aftermarket cams have much more lift than the Stock Cam, but not that much more duration.  This is why both probably ran into valve train problems at higher RPM.  Whenever valve lift increases, but duration remains about the same, the cam has 
Figure 4.34 Graph of All 3 Cams Using the History Log Note the
much steeper ramps 

name of
(is more aggressive 
the tests 
or has higher 
appear
acceleration rates) 
here in
and usually requires 
the
more valve spring.  
History
That is one reason 
Log as
cam grinders 
you
always recommend 
labeled 
you upgrade the 
the tests 
rest of the valve 
in the 
train when you go 
History
to a new cam. 
Log 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.35 also shows that even though the Solid Roller Cam had 264 degrees of Advertised Duration, it actually shows less duration on the graph than the Hydraulic Cam with only 220 degrees of Duration at .050” lift. Advertised duration numbers are always much higher than the duration at .050” numbers for the same cam. 
Figure 4.36 Zooming In on Overlap Area of Valve Lift Graph 

Without color it is difficult to see which line is which. Hydraulic Cam has highest overlap area 
\ 
Solid Roller has somewhat more overlap area than the Stock Cam 
Stock Cam has lowest overlap area 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.37 Zoomed In Graph on Intake Closing 

Cursor showed Solid Roller closes the Intake Valve at 298 degrees, about 16 degrees earlier than the other 2 cams. (That cursor position is not shown here.) 
Stock Cam and Hydraulic Roller have very similar Intake Closing events, about 612 degrees shown by cursor 
Crank Degrees of cursor position. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
More Analysis 
Table 4.2 shows a comparison of the 3 cams, looking at several different calculated results.  The table highlights some things we’ve already discussed.  Overall, the Stock Cam performs very well overall (the best Avg Torque and Avg HP), shows no Valve Train Problems, and produces the highest Est Idle Vacuum. 
Other points from Table 4.2 include: 
• 
Cam timing affects nearly every aspect of engine performance 

• 
Typically torque drops and HP increases when duration increases (Stock Cam vs Hydraulic Cam) 

• 
Intake Closing strongly affects lower RPM torque, Cranking Compression Pressure and Dynamic Compression Ratio.  (Compare Solid Roller to the other 2 cams.) 

• 
The higher the overlap area, the lower the Est Idle Vacuum. 

• 
Although these cams produce much more lift and are more aggressive, they show a very small amount of improvement, even drops in performance is some areas.  However, try these cams again with better heads, intake manifold, and exhaust headers, the story would probably be quite different.  This makes the point of how critical the combination of parts can be. 

• 
Note that the Total Exh/Int % is affected by the cam.  In the cases shown here, all are over 90% which is much higher than the typically recommended 75%.  In this case it is pointing out that the intake cam profile should probably be larger or the intake valve and port (possibly the intake manifold runner) should flow better. The proper selection of cam profile can make up for a poor flowing intake or exhaust port. 

• 
Vlv Area (the flow area through the valves) increases with larger cam profiles, making the point that it is the combination of the valve and port with the cam profile which determines how much air can flow through the engine. 


Table 4.2 Comparison or Cam Results 
Cam Name  Stock  Hydraulic  Solid Roller  
Int Duration  202  220  264 Advertised  
Intake Closing Event  72  72  56  
Peak Torque  268  257  272  
Avg Torque  236  221  233  
Peak HP  219  221  217  
Avg HP  161  155  156  
Valve Train Problems at 6000 RPM  None  Lifter Pump up  Valve Toss  

Overlap Area  .7  6.4  2.3  
Total Exh/Int %  90.5  94.8  92.2  
Int Vlv Area  150.7  168.7  157.1  
Exh Vlv Area  136.5  159.9  144.9  

Dynamic Comp Ratio  6.47  6.5  7.25  
Theo Crank Comprssn  150  151  176  
Est Idle Vacuum  21.6  14.6  18.9  

Rec Inertia Len for 4000 RPM  17.2  17.2  14.7  

Conclusions 
• 
The Engine Analyzer lets you input cam specs in several different ways, making it easy to compare cams from different cam grinders. 

• 
Cam timing affects nearly every aspect of engine performance. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer’s detailed output lets you see several ways engine performance can change, and lets you  investigate why performance has changed. 

• 
The History Log provides a convenient way to track your changes, without having to make notes on paper or printing out each performance run.  

• 
The History Log provides a convenient way to pick from (and label) up to 25 past tests to graph. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.3 Supercharging, Turbocharging And Nitrous Oxide 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Changing Supercharger Specs (Section 2.7) 

• 
Changing Running Conditions (Section 2.8) 


Popular street "bolt on" performance modifications include nitrous oxide injection systems, superchargers and turbochargers.  The Engine Analyzer lets you simulate all 3 types of systems. 
Supercharging and turbocharging are both likely to produce detonation or spark knock.  Therefore, the Octane you specify will have an important impact on performance.  The stock 302-4V is specified with 87 octane, available at any gas pump.  For the first case of Turbocharging, you will examine the effect of running 94 Octane fuel versus the 87.  You will then leave Octane at 94 for the other cases. 
Again you start with the 302-4V by opening it from the Engine Library by clicking on the Engine Library button.  If you don’t have a baseline in the History Log of the performance of the stock 302-4V (like the Stock Cam test from Example 4.2), calculate performance to obtain stock performance.   
Turbocharger: 
Check the Supercharger menu as shown in Figure 4.38.  You first want to check the performance potential of the 302-4V with a turbocharger.  First you must switch the Supercharger Type in the upper left corner from None to Turbocharger to indicate a turbocharger is now installed on the engine.  Notice the turbocharger specs now become enabled (not dimmed gray) so you can change them.  These specs require inputs to specify a turbocharger. 
Assume at this time you are not considering an intercooler, so leave Intercooler Eff % at 0, No Intercooler. Like many performance enthusiasts, you do not know  details about different turbochargers, so you will let the program pick turbocharger specs.  This is done by clicking on the Type item at the top of the Turbocharger section. Since your 302 is street driven, you should try a small turbocharger.  Small turbochargers "come on" quicker, at a lower RPM, which is better suited for the street. Select Estimate a Small Turbo from the list of Types. 
Also, the turbo supplier recommends a waste gate to limit boost to 10 PSI of boost, so enter 10 for Wastegate Limit, PSI.  The Turbocharger specs should now look like those in Figure 4.38. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.39 Graph of Stock 302-4V vs Small Turbocharger 
Calculate performance and review the Test Results: 
• 
This turbocharger provides a huge increase in torque, especially at low RPM. 

• 
Spark is retarded from optimum spark timing (what the engine wants to run) to as low as 5 degrees at some RPMs to avoid detonation.  This is 

indicated by the "*" for various Spark Adv numbers, and by the Spark Knock warning in the Notes section.. 

• 
Boost, PSI jumps up to 10.0 at 2000 RPM and stays there.  This is due to the wastegate limiting boost to the Wastegate Limit of 10 PSI you specified.  (For non-supercharged engines, this row of data called Boost is called Int Vacuum.) 

• 
Exh Pres is much higher than stock, increasing from 3.0 to 29.2 PSI.  This increased Exh Pres is where the turbo gets its power to compress the fresh air charge. 

• 
Actual CFM air flow has increased from 410 to 525 CFM at 6000 RPM.  The stock 600 CFM carb should still be adequate for flow. It will likely have to be rejetted, especially if this is a "blow through" system. 

• 
Fuel Flow has increased from 142 lbs/hr to 182 at 6000 RPM.  Fuel lines and fuel pump capacity may not be large enough.  If this was a fuel injected engine, the injectors may not be capable of handling the extra fuel flow.  Click on Analysis to obtain an Analysis Report which discusses fuel injector sizing and other important issues. 



You may have heard that turbocharging thrives on low back pressure, so try completely removing the exhaust system to see the effect on performance.  Although this is not possible for a street driven vehicle, it will give an idea of the "best possible" gain from installing a lower restriction exhaust system.  Calculate performance again with a turbocharger and with Exhaust System Type set to Open Exhaust (no mufflers).  Then recalculate performance to see this effect. 
Figure 4.40, Small and Medium Turbo Performance Without Exhaust System 

Note 29 ft lb and 85 HP increase with the Medium Turbocharger. 
Tests are being renamed with meaningful titles as they are being performed and added to the History Log. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The History Log shows that removing the exhaust system helped, but only 10 HP, improving Pk HP from 253 to 263.  Since a real exhaust system would only show less of a gain than no exhaust system, it may not be a good investment at this time.  Also notice that Exh Pres did not drop to 0 "Hg, but stayed up around 24 PSI.  That is because Exh Pres is the pressure before the turbo.  The pressure after the turbo (which is not reported) would drop to 0 since there was no restriction from an exhaust system. 
Since boost is “coming on” so quickly with the Wastegate controlling boost at 2000 RPM, perhaps a "small" turbo is too small.  Repeat the calculation with the Turbocharger Type set to Estimate a Medium Turbo.  Calculate performance and look at the History Log, as shown in Figure 4.40.  The History Log  shows performance improved significantly.  CFM has increased to 623 and Fuel 
Figure 4.41 Graph of Small vs Medium Turbo Performance 

Note that Medium turbo does not “beat” the small turbo until 2500 RPM, but above 2500 RPM the Medium turbo is the clear winner. 
Flow to 216 at 6000.  Perhaps now a larger carb would help performance, or you may need a larger fuel pump.   
For steady running performance, the medium size turbo appears to be a much better choice than the small turbo.  However, the Engine Analyzer does not simulate "turbo lag".  Smaller turbos are faster responding, which may be better for street performance and throttle response. Figure 4.41 show s a graph of the Medium Turbo vs the Small Turbo. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now that you know  that a “Medium” turbo could perform well, you may want to get actual specs from various turbo suppliers and do more precise simulations.  You could also load in Example turbos provided in the program by Performance Trends.  To see what Example turbos are available, click on Turbocharger Type and select the Pick an Example option, or click on the Get Example button at the bottom of the menu. 
Safety Note: Remember, the turbo manufacturer or supplier has experience with factors not considered by the Engine Analyzer. These factors include high exhaust temperatures, over revving the turbo, turbo lag, etc.  The Engine Analyzer should only be used to estimate performance gains and understand the performance tradeoffs. Installing a turbo not properly matched to the engine can be dangerous to you and your engine. 
Centrifugal Supercharger: 
Return to the Supercharger menu and switch from a turbocharger to a belt driven, Centrifugal supercharger.  Choose the Centrifugal Supercharger for the Supercharger Type in the upper left corner of the Supercharger Menu.   
You have a friend who has an older used Paxton (tm) supercharger who will sell it cheap. There is a Paxton Example already provided by Performance Trends in the Centrifugal Supercharger Examples.  Click on Get Examples, then pick the Centrifugal 
Figure 4.43 List of Performance Trends Centrifugal Supercharger Examples 

Choose the Original Paxton from the list, click on it to highlight it, then click on Pick.  The program will show some screens comparing the current Centrifugal Supercharger specs with those you picked for the Original Paxton.  Then there will probably be a “disclaimer” message, then a note explaining that the specs for the Example Original Paxton will be printed in blue.  See Figure 4.44. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
For the other 2 “non-blue” Centrifugal Supercharger specs, you should set them to match your setup. These are not based on the Original Paxton example. For Intercooler Eff % choose 0 No Intercooler. The supercharger Belt Ratio can be calculated by clicking on the Clc button and then entering a crank pulley diameter of 3.5 inches and supercharger pulley diameter of 2.0, pulleys that come with the used Paxton.  This works out to a belt ratio of 1.75.  See Figure 4.45  For a fair comparison to the turbo engine, leave off the exhaust system Exhaust System Type of Open Exhaust (no mufflers) and the Octane at 94.  Calculate Performance with the Original 

Figure 4.46 shows the test results for the Original Paxton with the History Log.  Notice in the Notes section that “S/C RPM High”, meaning that the Max Safe Pulley RPM entered in the Supercharger menu for the Original Paxton has been exceeded at some RPMs.  The performance graph in Figure 4.47 shows a sharp drop in Torque and HP after 5000 RPM, which is due to this Max Safe Pulley RPM being exceeded. (Note that the real supercharger’s performance may not drop at these higher RPMs.  The program is forcing performance to drop to make sure you notice that something may be going wrong with the supercharger at these higher RPMs.) 
Figure 4.46, Performance Comparison of Turbo and Centrifugal Supercharger 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.47 Graph Comparison of Medium Turbo and Original Paxton 

The results from both Figure 4.46 and 4.47 show performance for the Original Paxton being down significantly compared to the Medium Turbo.  However, compared to stock, Peak HP has increased over 100 HP.  Another interesting thing in the results is that Friction HP has increased significantly.  For example at 5000 RPM it went from 86 HP for the turbo to 110 HP with the supercharger.  This extra Friction HP is primarily for the power required to run the supercharger. 
Safety Note: Unlike real superchargers, you can over-rev the supercharger in the Engine Analyzer with no problems. Always follow the manufacturer's recommendations for maximum belt ratios and Max Safe Pulley RPM limits. 
Since the centrifugal supercharger provides pretty good higher RPM power, you are considering installing nitrous oxide injection as well. You have heard that nitrous delivers tremendous low speed torque, which would fill in torque at low RPM where the supercharger builds little boost. At the Running Conditions menu, install a "small" 75 HP, single stage nitrous system, activated at 
2000 RPM by setting the Nitrous Oxide System specs as shown in Figure 4.48. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.49 Original Paxton with and without Nitrous Oxide Injection 

Note the large torque increase at low RPM with the nitrous oxide injection kit. 
Calculate Performance and then graph the results for this condition of the Original Paxton with a 75 HP Nitrous Oxide kit.  See Figure 4.49. 
Figure 4.49 shows the large torque increase at low RPM that you expected.  Now graph the Paxton + Nitrous Oxide test with the Medium Turbo test, as shown in Figure 4.50. 
Figure 4.50 Paxton + Nitrous Oxide vs Medium Turbo 

Paxton with 75 HP Nitrous Oxide kit outperforms the Medium Turbo at all RPMs until the Max Safe Pulley RPM limit is exceeded at 5500 RPM. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
At the Test Results screen, click on Analyze in the menu bar to produce an Analysis Report.  Fill in the Analysis Options menu as shown in Figure 4.51, then click on Make Report. The Analysis Report will point out that you are making tremendous amounts of torque, and high cylinder pressures must be dealt with. See Figure 4.52. 
As pointed out with the turbo set-up, Actual CFM air flow and Fuel Flow have increased significantly.  The fuel system components may need to be enlarged and the carburetor rejetted. 
Conclusions: 
• 
Turbocharging, supercharging and injecting nitrous oxide can provide a significant performance increase. 

• 
Turbocharging and supercharging make an engine prone to spark knock. Care must be taken to prevent detonation by retarding spark, running high octane fuel, not increasing (or even reducing) Compression Ratio etc. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer provides a method to estimate performance increases and point out potential problems before the modification is made on the actual engine (excessive spark knock, insufficient fuel pump capacity, excessive Supercharger RPM etc.) 

• 
As with any modifications, the Engine Analyzer can not consider all details.  Therefore, you must follow the manufacturer's recommendations for safe, reliable operation of a particular system. 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.4 Using Flow Bench Data 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Calculating Valve Flow Effcy in the Head(s) menu (Section 2.9.5) 

• 
Calculating Runner Flow Effcy in the Intake System menu (Section 2.9.6) 

• 
Appendix 3  Intake and Exhaust Tuning 


Check Appendix 5 and 6 for MANY new features added in std and Plus versions 3.2 and 3.4 for describing the head’s flow potential, including using a full flow curve. 
The Engine Analyzer allows you to enter flow bench data for your cylinder heads and intake manifold separately.  From this information you can determine the flow restriction of the head; and flow restriction and tuning capabilities of the manifold runner or header. 
To use the Engine Analyzer's full capabilities, it is necessary to flow the head first with an optimum entrance or exit adapter, and then with the manifold or header.  For this example you will use the intake side of the 302-4V's head modified with a 1.94" intake valve diameter.  You will also use an aftermarket manifold with rectangular runners 2" high by 1.2" wide.  The flow numbers used in the example are arbitrary.  Your flow tests will likely show similar but not equivalent trends. 
Flow Test: 
This flow test will be performed at 28" water test pressure, but it could be any test pressure over 7" water. The Engine Analyzer needs data at an L/D (valve lift to diameter ratio) of 1/4, which is .485" valve lift for the 1.94" valve.  To obtain the optimum air flow for the bare head, it is necessary to install a radiused inlet adapter on the bare head's intake port.   
Set up the test condition of 28" test pressure and .485" lift with the adapter.  The flow reads 201 CFM.  Leave all settings "as is" and remove the adapter.  You will note the flow falls to 191 CFM when you adjust the test pressure back to 28".  (It may be necessary to shut down the flow bench between readings to avoid overheating.) 
Now install the intake manifold without the carb or throttle body.  Be sure all openings in the manifold other than carb/throttle body opening are sealed.  This includes all runners not being tested, vacuum ports, EGR openings, etc.  Adjust the test pressure back to 28" 
and you obtain a reading of 194 CFM.  Note that the head and intake flow better than just the bare head without the adapter.   
Now, start up the Engine Analyzer program.  Open a new copy of the 302-4V file by clicking on the Engine Library button.  Calculate performance to obtain baseline performance with the production head and intake manifold.   
Now we’ll calculate the new head Port Diameter and Valve Flow Effcy, and intake manifold Runner Diameter and Runner Flow Efficiency.  Click on Head(s) to bring up the Head(s) menu.  Enter the new Valve Diameter of 1.94.  If this head has had some port work done when the larger valves were installed, you should CC the ports, which showed an increase from the stock 145 ccs to the new 152 ccs. Type in 152 for Intake Port Volume, and you will notice Avg Port Diameter increases from 1.5 to 1.54.  As you would expect, the port length does not change from doing port work. 
Now click on the Clc button next to Intake Valve Flow Effcy to produce the menu shown in Figure 4.53.  Enter the flow data for the head alone as shown in Figure 4.53.  Click on Use Calc Value to load in the 44.4% Flow Efficiency calculated here.  (Note in Figure 4.53 that you could have used any valve lift between .400 and .550 inches, and that you did not have to use exactly .485 inches.) 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The changes to the Head(s) specs should now be 1.54” Avg Port Diameter, 152 Port ccs and 44.4% Valve Flow Effcy, all for the Intake Port.  Click on OK to close the Head(s) menu. 
Click on Intake System to open the Intake System menu.  Since this is a different manifold than stock, you may have to change several specs.  Click on the Clc button next to the Runner Diameter box to produce the Calc Runner Flow Effcy menu shown in Figure 4.54. Make the entries as shown, using “Rounded Rectangular” as the basic shape of the manifold runner. The program calculates an effective circular diameter of 1.69" for a rectangular runner 2" high by 1.2" wide.  Click on Use Calc Value to load 1.69" into Runner Diameter in the Intake System menu. 

Last, click on the Clc button for Runner Flow Effcy to obtain the Calc Runner Flow Effcy menu shown in Figure 4.55 (previous). Figure 4.55 shows the test data from Table 4.3 filled in and a calculated Runner Flow Effcy of 86%.  Click on Use Calc Value to return to the Intake System menu with 86% entered for Runner Flow Effcy. 
Table 4.3 Flow Test Results 
Condition  Test Pressure  Valve Lift  L/D  CFM  
Bare head, no adapter  28"  .485"  1/4  191  
Bare head, optimum adapter  28"  .485"  1/4  201  
Head and intake  28"  .485"  1/4  194  

This new manifold is a dual plane design, like the stock manifold so the Design will stay at Dual Plane-Carbs.  The average length of the intake runners measure 6 inches like the stock intake, so Runner Length will stay at 6.  The same carburetor will be used, so Carb specs will stay the same as stock. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The Intake System menu should now look like Figure 4.56.  These specifications reflect a head with a larger intake valve, manifold with larger runners, and flow coefficients which were determined from actual flow bench testing. 

test results.  They show: 
• 
Peak torque has increased from 268 at 3000 to 282 at 4000 RPM. 

• 
Peak HP has increased from 219 at 4500 to 258 at 5500. 

• 
Peak In InertiaPrs (intake pressure due to inertia tuning) has increased from 1.3 at 4500 to 2.5 PSI at 5000. 

• 
The Mach # at all RPMs has decreased approximately 27%, which means this engine can rev higher before "running out of breath".  This is also evident by the Intake Vlv Area in the Special Calculations section increasing about 35 %, from 150.7 sq-in*deg to 204.4 sq-in*deg. 

• 
The Total Exh/Int % dropped from 90.5% to 66.8%, which is now much less than the "target" 75% with the new intake system.  This suggests performance could now be significantly improved with better flowing exhaust ports and runners, or more exhaust cam lift and duration. 


It is important to remember that performance for the engine improved because the head and manifold flowed more CFM on a flow bench than the stock parts. Performance did not improve just because the parts were flow tested.  The flow testing results simply let the program more accurately predict how much better the engine would perform.  Flow testing by itself does not improve performance. 
Alternate (but less accurate) Method: 
If it is difficult to design optimum exhaust and intake adapters, or this data is not available, it is best to flow the head with the appropriate manifold or header.  For the example above, this would give 194 CFM.  Some of the restriction is due to the valve and some is due to the manifold runner. 
A reasonable assumption is 4% of the total flow restriction is due to the runner.  If you multiply the CFM flow for both the port and manifold together by 1.04 you will obtain a reasonable flow value to use for the bare head.  In this case 194 CFM x 1.04 = 202 CFM.  Using 202 CFM you would calculate a Valve Flow Effcy of 44.7%, and 194 would calculate a Runner Flow Effcy of 83.8%.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Engine Analyzer's calculation menus allow you to easily calculate both Valve Flow Effcy and Runner Flow Effcy from flow bench data to more accurately predict performance improvements. 

• 
An alternative method is suggested if you only have data for flowing the head and manifold as a unit. 


Figure 4.57 Graph of Stock 302-4V vs Flow Tested Head and Manifold 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.5 Optimizing Tuning 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): • Example 4.4 
• 
Appendix 1  Accuracy and Assumptions 

• 
Appendix 3  Intake and Exhaust Tuning 

• 
Analysis Report (Section 3.1) 


The Engine Analyzer simulates the pressure pulsations which are present in the intake and exhaust runners.  These pulsations are critical to obtain optimum performance, especially for naturally aspirated, free flowing race engines.  With intake and exhaust systems designed to take advantage of these pulses, volumetric efficiencies of well over 100% are possible without supercharging. 
Since tuning effects are most noticeable with free flowing heads, individual runner intake systems, and high overlap cams, you will use the HYDRPLN-V6 engine for this example.  The goal of this example is to design an intake and exhaust system for optimum tuning at 8000 RPM.  Optimum tuning at 8000 should also optimize performance at 8000 RPM. 
Intake Tuning 
Open a copy of HYDRPLN-V6 from the library.  Open the Running Conditions menu and set the Starting RPM to 5000, Number of RPMs to 10 and RPM Increment to 500.  The RPM Preview should show “5000, 5500, 6000 ... 9500”.  You want to be sure that 8000 RPM is fully contained in the RPM range you are going to run. 
Check the ‘Starting Point’ Suggestions specs in the Running Conditions menu.  Since you want to optimize tuning and performance at 8000 RPM, set the spec For Peak HP at This RPM to 8000. Also, because the current intake port in the head is 5” and the intake runner in the injection stacks is 13”, enter 18” for the spec For This Intake Runner Len. 
Calculate performance "as is" to get a baseline of the current engine.  The Engine Analyzer will give suggestions for intake and exhaust runner dimensions and cam specs for good performance at 8000 RPM.  The results are shown in Figure 4.59.   
Once performance is calculated as shown in Figure 4.59, the Engine Analyzer can create an Analysis Report. Click on Analyze to bring up the Analysis Options menu as shown in Figure 4.58.  Since this is a race engine that you want to produce good HP at 8000 RPM, set Desired HP Peak RPM to 8000 and Application to Full Race. The program will use these guidelines and analyze the calculated performance, for ways to meet your objectives, point out potential safety concerns, etc.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.59 Baseline Test Results with ‘Suggestions’ for 8000 RPM Click on View, the Show Special Calcs (large) for bottom screen 
Piston Spd and Piston Gs (indicators of internal stresses on the pistons, rods etc.) increase rapidly with increasing RPM. 
Overlap %VE indicates effectivness of resonance tuning 
Three intake tuning factors show strength of intake inertia and resonance tuning. 
Two exhaust tuning factors show strength of exhaust tuning. 


Bottom half of Special Calculations section shows ‘Starting Point’ Suggestions for an RPM you enter at the Running Conditions menu. 
Click and drag slide 
bar to view lower 
section of results. 
Pay close attention to this note describing limitations of these suggestions. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
IMPORTANT: The Engine Analyzer can NOT anticipate all UNSAFE and poor performing situations.  Do NOT rely only on the Analysis report to point out problems and SAFETY HAZARDS. 
As you read through the Analysis Report of Figure 4.60, some important points made by the report include: 
• 
The engine is producing high torque for this engine displacement, indicating good performance but the necessity for good head gaskets, etc. 

• 
Int Vacuum is somewhat high.  Performance will likely improve with a higher Throttle Body CFM Rating (larger throttle or better flowing throttle plates). This is a common problem with Individual Runner carburetor or injection intake systems. 

• 
Piston Spd (average piston speed) is in the normal range for a race engines, but this level of  Piston Spd requires extremely strong and light reciprocating components, like connecting rods, pistons, etc. 

• 
The engine would likely improve performance at 8000 RPM (while losing some torque at lower RPM) with shorter and larger diameter intake runners. 

• 
Since the spec For Peak HP at This RPM is 8000 (the same as the Analysis Option's Desired HP Peak RPM), you should check the Starting Point ‘Suggestions’ at the end of the calculated performance report. These runner and cam recommendations may give better performance at 8000 RPM than the current specs. 


If certain results look normal for this type of application (in this case Full Race), they may not be mentioned in the Analysis Report.  It is always good to do your own analysis of the calculated performance.  Important points shown on the performance printout in Figure 4.58 and not mentioned in the Analysis Report include: 
• Mach # at 8000 RPM is a relatively 
Figure 4.60 Portion of Analysis Report 
Click and 

low .466 indicating the intake valve should not be a major restriction at this RPM.  (Note that you always want more flow area to produce a lower Mach #.  Its just that .466 indicates the intake valve and port and cam profile are not overly restrictive.) 
• 
The Total Exh/Int % of 72.5 is close to the recommended 75%.  The exhaust may benefit slightly from more cam or valve flow, but it should not be overly restrictive. 

• 
In the RPM Data section, the peak In InertiaPrs of 4.9 PSI occurs at 5000 RPM.  This says the current intake runner dimensions give optimum inertia tuning at 5000 RPM rather than the desired 8000 RPM. 

• 
The contribution to volumetric efficiency during overlap is high, shown by the high values of Overlap %VE of over 7% at 5500 RPM. 

• 
In ResTunPrs pulses are high, showing a maximum of 1.4 PSI at 5500 RPM and a minimum of -.9 PSI at 6000 RPM. 

• 
The Est Idle Vac of 3” indicates this cam has a huge amount of overlap, which is required for a high RPM race engine. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Due to the high RPM, relatively long intake runners, and high overlap camshaft, intake resonance tuning (In ResTunPrs) may be important for this engine.  One can see that when In ResTunPrs is high and positive, Overlap %VE is high, Vol Eff % is high and torque and HP are high.  Where In ResTunPrs is a high negative number (vacuum pulse during overlap), Overlap %VE, Vol Eff %, torque and HP are low. 
At the bottom of Figure 4.58, in the Special Calculations section, there are some Starting Point Suggestions for intake and exhaust runner dimensions.  Repeat the performance calculations 3 times with the intake runner combinations from Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4 Starting Point Suggestions for Runner Dimensions at 8000 RPM 
Case  Int Port & Runner Length *  Int Port & Runner Dia *  
Inertia Tuning  9.9  1.68  
2nd Pulse  16.8  2.18  
3rd Pulse  12.1  1.85  

* Important:  The Starting Point Suggestions are for the entire intake runner, from the valve to the end of the runner.  However the runner is broken into 2 parts in the program, the port in the head and the runner in the intake manifold.  For these modifications, you will leave the Port Length in the Head(s) Specs menu at 5”, and just change the Runner Length in the Intake System menu to make up the suggested total length.  For Port & Runner Dia, you will set the Port Diameter in the Head(s) menu and Runner Diameter in the Intake System menu both to the suggested diameter. 
Table 4.5 shows a summary of the test results trying the 3 different intake runner recommendations. 
Table 4.5 Comparison of 3 Intake Starting Point Suggestions 
Condition Stock Inertia 2nd Pulse 3rd Pulse HP @ 8000 256 310 297 209 Avg HP from History Log 241 262 245 255 
Overlap %VE @ 8000  4.3  4.6  5.0  5.0  
In InertiaPrs @ 8000  1.3  3.2  2.4  3.0  
In ResTunPrs @ 8000  0.1  0.5  1.0  1.0  

For the combination of the existing head with the “2nd Pulse” intake runner suggestion, you get the warning message shown in Figure 
4.61. Because you are just trying things, and you actually do want to try this unusual combo, click on Yes to proceed. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.62 shows a comparison between the stock intake and one designed for optimum inertia tuning (9.9" x 1.68" runners).  Both Table 4.5 and Figure 4.62 show a significant increase in higher RPM performance.  Table 4.5 shows that inertia tuning is strong at 8000 (In InertiaPrs is 3.2 PSI), but resonance tuning is relatively low (In ResTunPrs is .5 PSI) compared to the other recommended lengths.  Figure 4.62 also shows a slight resonance tuning peak occurring at 7500 to 8000 RPM, and another more evident one at 9500 RPM. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.64 shows that both the Optimum Inertia Tuning runner and Third Pulse runner give good performance through the 7000­9000 RPM range, but overall the Optimum Inertia Tuning runner is best. 
Although this example shows resonance tuning to have a significant effect, most engines with shorter runners, less overlap and lower RPM ranges should be designed for optimum inertia tuning. 
Figure 4.64 Comparison of Optimum Inertia vs “3rd Pulse” Tuning Runners 

The intake runner dimensions which give optimum resonance tuning for the 3rd reflected pulse produces more HP only at 8500 RPM. At all other RPMs, runners which produce optimum Inertia tuning perform better. 
Safety Note: In Figure 4.58, note the rapid increase in Piston Gs (internal stress) as RPM increases.  All 3 tuned systems make more power at higher RPM, therefore it is likely the engine will "see" higher RPM running.  If your rotating components are not designed for these high G levels, you may want to tune for a lower RPM.  Also, an overspeed set to a safe RPM limit is always a good idea. 
This is also pointed out in the Analysis Report when it discusses high Piston Spd (average piston speed).  Piston Spd and Piston Gs are related.  High levels of either require strong, light reciprocating components. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

The ExTun Prs pressure (exhaust tuning pressure) is best at 5500 RPM showing -2.4 PSI of suction.  The negative sign indicates suction which helps performance on the exhaust side. 
Now, try installing the 1st Pulse runner length recommended by the Engine Analyzer in Figure 4.58 of 32.3" and diameter of 1.54".  Note that the program assumes 3” of exhaust runner exist in the exhaust port in the head.  Therefore, you should use 29.3” (32.3”-3”) for the Header Primary Length and 1.54 for the Header Primary Diameter (inside diameter) in the Exhaust System menu. 
Note that peak ExTun Prs of -2.4 now occurs at 6000 and 6500, which is less than 8000 you were expecting, but still is peaking at a higher RPM than it originally did.  The recommended length gives slightly better performance throughout a range of RPMs, with 8000 RPM in the middle of this range.  Notice that below 6500 RPM Ex TunPrs drops off quickly, but above 6500 RPM it drops quite slowly.  If you designed for best exhaust tuning at 8000 RPM, at  RPMs below 8000 RPM, exhaust tuning would be quite poor. 
Figure 4.65 shows performance of the stock exhaust and the recommended exhaust.  Note that the optimum exhaust shows only slight gain through the RPM range. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
This example makes some important points: 
• 
Exhaust tuning is not as effective at making performance improvements as intake tuning, especially when intake tuning is already good.  Exhaust tuning can only scavenge the clearance volume.  However, intake tuning cam both scavenge the clearance volume and provide supercharging at intake closing due to inertia tuning. 

• 
Once the clearance volume has been scavenged clean, additional scavenging only goes to "short circuiting".  Short circuiting is when fresh charge goes right through the chamber out the exhaust during overlap.  This is probably the case here at 8000 RPM. Overlap %VE was already high at 8000 with the stock engine.  Providing additional scavenging vacuum from the exhaust was of little help. 

• 
This example also illustrates that it may be beneficial to tune the intake to the RPM for desired peak HP,  Then tune the exhaust to a different RPM, one where intake resonance tuning is reducing power.  That would be an RPM where In ResTunPrs was negative.  The overall effect would be a broader torque curve. 


Conclusions: 
• 
The Engine Analyzer's Analysis Report gives tips for improving performance. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer allows you to simulate simple intake and exhaust tuning principles. 

• 
Intake tuning generally has more impact on performance than exhaust tuning. 

• 
The ‘Starting Point’ Suggestions at the bottom of the Special Calculations section of the results give some ideas of intake and exhaust runner dimensions which may give good performance.  Note that you must try them in the program to determine which are best, or if they work well with the rest of your engine combination. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
Background: 
The Engine Analyzer was developed as a: 
• 
Learning aid for those who want to better understand internal combustion engines. 

• 
Tool to help predict effects of certain engine modifications for engine builders, racers, and performance enthusiasts. 

• 
"Theoretical Dynamometer" to allow anyone to try things which are too expensive, difficult, or impossible with a real engine. 


The Engine Analyzer will provide you an engineering estimate of what should occur when general modifications are made based on internal combustion engine theory and several "rules of thumb".  By seeing all the specifications which go into the calculated results, you may have a false sense that the computer knows your engine exactly, what manufacturer's intake manifold and carburetor are installed, who ported the heads, the exact cam profile.  Actually the computer does not know if the specifications are for a Model T or a Formula 1 engine. 
A good analogy to the Engine Analyzer is a flow bench.  A flow bench can not predict exact torque and HP curves, but is still a vital tool for engine development.  In the same way, use the Engine Analyzer results as a guide, as a second opinion of how your engine should perform under near optimum conditions. 
Iterations: 
Before you talk about accuracy, it is important for you to understand the types of calculations going on inside the Engine Analyzer and other sophisticated simulation programs.  A simple program could involve calculating torque from volumetric efficiency: 
Torque = K x volumetric efficiency 
Where: K is a constant which includes engine displacement 
You enter a volumetric efficiency and obtain a torque value.  The answer you obtain on the left side of the equation has no effect on the inputs on the right side of the equations.  (Some rather expensive programs are based on an equation no more complex than this.) 
However, lets look at a simplified version of the equation which calculates the temperature rise of intake air as it passes through the intake port. 
End Temp = Intake Temp + K * (End Temp + Intake Temp) 
In this case the "End Temp" answer you get on the left side has an effect on the inputs to the equation on the right.  The only way to solve equations like this is through "iterations".  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
 Iteration is a process where you assume an answer, use that answer in the right side of the equation, calculate the actual answer and see if the actual answer is "close enough" to the answer you assumed.  For example: 
Iteration Process: For this example, use above equation with K=.3, Intake Temp = 80 Assume End Temp is 145 degrees Calculate End Temp: 80 + .3 * ( 145 + 80 ) = 147.5 Are assumed End Temp and Calculated 
End Temp Close Enough (within 1 degree) No, so do again using new End Temp answer Calculate End Temp: 80 + .3 * ( 147.5 + 80 ) = 148.25 Are assumed End Temp and Calculated 
End Temp Close Enough (within 1 degree) Yes, so an approximate answer is: End Temp = 148.25 degrees 
If "close enough" was 3 degrees, our first answer of 147.5 degrees would have been good enough.  If "close enough" was .1 degree, it may require many more calculations to arrive at an answer which is "close enough".  If the equation is very complex and the inputs are an unusual combination, no answer may be reached no matter how many times the calculation is performed.  This is called "not converging on a solution".   
Making the tolerance ("close enough") small will produce more exact answers but will require more calculation time.  Performance Trends has selected tolerance bands for iterations which give good accuracy with reasonable calculation times. 
Because many of the equations within the Engine Analyzer must be solved by iterations, there is no one exact answer.  All calculations are an approximation.  Therefore, do not be alarmed if a Total Avg Flow Coef in the Special Calculations section is calculated as .357 for "straight up" cam timing and as .358 with 4 degrees of cam advance.  These numbers are close enough that they should be considered equal.  Advancing the cam should not and did not change Total Avg Flow Coef. 
Correlation with Dynamometer Data: 
The Engine Analyzer has been validated using dynamometer data from engines which were generally "streetable", getting between 
0.5 to 2.0 HP per cubic inch.  With the improved tuning simulations, the Engine Analyzer Version 3, Brk Tq  and Brake HP results compared within ±7% of the actual dynamometer data at most RPMs.  For example, if the Engine Analyzer predicted 400 ft lbs of peak torque, the actual engine would produce from 372 to 428 ft lbs from dynamometer tests. 
One must also remember that dynamometer testing is not an "exact science".  How many times have you seen Cam Grinder A's dyno data show their cam better than Cam Grinder B, but Cam Grinder B's dyno data says their cam is better.  Significant variability exists from run to run, day to day and especially from dyno facility to dyno facility.  Therefore, the dyno data you are comparing to the Engine Analyzer results may be in error more than the program.  See Appendix 4. 
The weakest area for the Engine Analyzer is the intake and exhaust tuning, and somewhat in the area of cam timing.  This is true of most any reasonable sophisticated engine simulation program, including the “million dollar” programs used by Ford and GM.  (Simplistic programs don’t even attempt to estimate tuning effects.)  Both these areas have an important impact on performance of high output race engines. You are continuing to improve this as you learn more.  More accurate calculations are possible with the Engine Analyzer "Pro".  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Major Assumptions: 
To make the Engine Analyzer and the specifications which describe the engine containable on a personal computer, several simplifying assumptions are made which are listed below.  Other approximations and assumptions exist as identified in Section 1.3 A Word of Caution and scattered throughout this manual.  See Assumptions in the Index. 
• 
All cylinders in the engine are identical. 

• 
There is a very simplified simulation of the influences from one cylinder on another with regard to intake or exhaust tuning effects. Carb or throttle body restriction level and Exh System CFM Rating are simulated correctly to handle total flow from all cylinders, considering the Intake Manifold Design and an assumed Exhaust System design. 

• 
The fuel remains liquid in the intake manifold and the cylinder until the intake valve closes.  Therefore, vaporization of the fuel does not displace any air or reduce volumetric efficiency or performance.  

• 
The program attempts to predict the A/F distribution and A/F mixture quality based on very simple assumptions.  The program assumes there are not major A/F distribution problems. 

• 
The Octane number of Gas reduces the vapor pressure of the Gas.  This means that the higher the Octane # for the Gas, the more likely A/F Mixture Quality problems. 

• 
Cam timing and profiles are assumed to be typical of "off the shelf" cams.  Profiles are assumed symmetric, that means the opening ramp is the same as the closing ramp.  Generally this simulates asymmetric cams quite well also. 

• 
For Gas simulations, the energy released during combustion is based on a fuel called octane, with a heating value of approximately 19,000 BTU/lb.  For Alcohol, the heating value is 8,600 BTU/LB. 

• 
The frictional drag from the three (3) Losses specs in the Short Block menu increase with increased engine displacement.  For example, if you specify a stroke which is 20% longer to the Engine Analyzer, displacement increases 20% and so does the friction from these 3 sources. 

• 
No dynamics of the valve train are simulated until major problems like Valve Toss or Lifter Pump Up are estimated to occur.  The Engine Analyzer assumes a near perfect valve train, except that some Rocker Arm Ratio bending is assumed.  The higher the Rocker Arm Ratio, the more bending assumed.  Rocker Arm Ratio is assumed constant, and Valve Lash does not change with temperature. 

• 
Intake and exhaust tuning are very complex simulations as identified in Appendix 3.  Small changes in air temperature, surface temperature within the air tracts and effects from other cylinders make exact tuning simulations impossible.  See Appendix 3 for more complete tuning assumptions. 

• 
All combustion chambers are burning the air/fuel mixture well.  Although the Chamber Design spec in the Head(s) menu will show some difference for different chamber designs, the program assumes there are no major problems. 

• 
There are no ignition system problems. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Appendix 2: Summary of 4 Cycle, Internal Combustion Engine Theory 
Most performance enthusiasts know the 4 processes which occur in the 4 cycle, internal combustion engine, namely:
 -Intake 
-Compression 
-Combustion and Expansion 
-Exhaust 
However, many do not fully understand the theory of how these processes make HP, or how you change these processes to make more HP.  
Let's look more closely at the Combustion and Expansion part of the cycle, the portion of the cycle which actually makes power. Four cycle, IC (internal combustion) engines produce power from the chemical energy stored in the fuel they burn.  This stored energy is released when the fuel burns in the cylinder with oxygen in the air. The heat which is released, heats the air which is trapped in the cylinder, raising its pressure which pushes on the piston and turns the crankshaft.  This whole process can be thought of as the "explosion" which occurs when the spark plug fires.  
Let's examine the chemical energy in the fuel which is released in the engine.  If you look at the engine as just a "black box" (Figure A.1); you do not know what goes on inside, except that fuel goes in and horsepower comes out.  You can calculate the amount of horsepower the fuel contains if you know the flow rate of the fuel and the chemical energy of the fuel. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Example of "Black Box" Engine 
            Fuel Flow Rate = 40 lbs/hr 
Chemical Energy in Fuel = 19,000 BTU/lb 
Conversion factor: 1 HP = 2544 BTU/hr 
        HP into "Black Box": 
(1) 40 lbs/hr x 19,000 BTU/lb = 299 HP 2544 BTU/hr 
If you knew the efficiency of this "black box" engine at converting chemical energy into mechanical energy (HP), you could calculate its HP output.  For this example, let's say the "black box" engine is 25% efficient. 
(2) Efficiency =HP out x 100% HP in 
        Filling in the information you know into eq (2): 
25% = HP out x 100% 299 HP 
        Rearranging terms: 
            HP out =25% x 299 = 75 HP 100% 
        Power out of "Black Box" engine: 
(3) F.F.R x C.E.F x Eff = HP out 2544 
Where: F.F.R. = Fuel Flow Rate, lb/hr 
C.E.F. = Chemical Energy of Fuel, BTU/lb Eff = Total Engine Efficiency 
Using this simple logic, if the efficiency stays the same, all you have to do is pump more fuel into the engine to produce more power.  For example, remove the carburetor and dump the fuel directly down the intake manifold.  You could pump the gas tank dry in a matter of minutes, but you all know that the engine would probably produce no power at all.  The energy in the fuel can only be released if there is enough oxygen available to burn it completely and the fuel and air are well mixed in the right proportions.    
Under perfect conditions, it takes about 14.6 lbs of air to completely burn 1 lb of fuel (an air/fuel ratio of 14.6:1, or A/F = 14.6)*.  Under these conditions, extra fuel over the 14.6 A/F is wasted and can severely reduce power if extremely rich (A/F ratios richer than 11.0). This wasting of fuel decreases efficiency "Eff".  Therefore, to get more fuel into the engine to produce more HP, you must also get more air in so the fuel can burn completely.  From this information, you can add something to the equation for the "black box" engine, that HP does not depend on fuel flow, but more importantly on air flow.  You will replace the "Fuel Flow Rate" with "Air Flow Rate / Air/Fuel Ratio". 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
   HP from "Black Box" Engine: 
(4) A.F.R x C.E.F. x Eff = HP out A/F 2544 
Where: A.F.R. = Air Flow Rate, lb/hr A/F = Air Fuel Ratio 
Although it's easy to get extra fuel into the engine, it is difficult to get more air (oxygen) into the engine.  The amount of oxygen the engine takes in for a given amount of time depends on: 
• 
The amount of air the engine can take into the cylinder(s) on one Intake Stroke. 

• 
The # of intake strokes in the given amount of time. 

• 
The density of the air that enters the cylinder. 

• 
The amount of oxygen in the air, which is always 21% , unless you are using nitrous oxide or a fuel which contains oxygen like Alcohol.  


The amount of air the engine can take in on one Intake Stroke depends on the number and the size of the cylinders.  This is the engine's displacement or CID (cubic inch displacement). 
The # of intake strokes in a given amount of time is the engine's speed or RPM/2.  RPM is divided by 2 because 4 cycle engines ingest air only once for each 2 revolutions. 
The density of the air that enters the cylinder depends on many engine design characteristics, for example intake system restrictions, cam timing, etc.  A number which describes how dense the air is which enters the cylinder is the Volumetric Efficiency, or Vol Eff % as it is called by the Engine Analyzer. See Vol Eff % in Section 2.8.  These 3 items are what determine the Air Flow Rate in equation (4). 
* Although 14.6 A/F is the perfect ratio chemically, not every oxygen molecule in the air will "find" a fuel molecule to react (burn) with. Therefore, since air flow is the factor limiting power, extra fuel is added to better ensure every oxygen molecule in the air can find a fuel molecule.  For this reason, actual engines run at 11.5-13.5 A/F to obtain  maximum power. 
(5) A.F.R. = CID x RPM x 60 x VE % x .0764 1728 2 100% 
Where: CID  is the cubic inch displacement of the engine RPM is the engine speed VE % is the volumetric efficiency in % (for the air which 
    actually stays in the cylinder) 1728 converts cubic inches to cubic feet 60 converts RPM to Revs per Hour .0764 is an approximate density of air (lb/cu ft) 100 is to convert VE % to a simple fraction 

        Multiplying all the constants together: 
(6) A.F.R. = CID x RPM x VE % x .00001326 
        Substituting equation (6) into equation (4): 
(7) HP out = CID X RPM x VE % x .00001326 x C.E.F. x Eff A/F 2544 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Now, lets look at the last term in the equation, "Eff".  This efficiency term is actually talking about 2 separate efficiencies: 
Thermal Efficiency (related to BSFC in the Engine Analyzer’s results):  The thermal efficiency is an engineering term that describes how efficiently the combustion and expansion process makes use of the heat energy which pushes on the piston during the expansion stroke.  Explaining thermal efficiency can get quite complex for this discussion.  However, a simple illustration of thermal inefficiency is the heat left in the exhaust gasses.  If the thermal efficiency of the engine were higher, more of the heat of combustion would be used to push on the piston, less heat would be exhausted from the cylinder, and the exhaust would be cooler.  The thermal efficiency is quite difficult to improve beyond the range of .40 (40%), with most engines having a thermal efficiency of .25 (25%) to .35 (35%). 
Mechanical Efficiency (related to Friction HP in the Engine Analyzer’s results):  Up to this point you have talked only about the amount of work the burned gases or "explosion" does on the top of the piston.  This work done on the piston is called Indicated Work or Indicated HP.  However, not all this Indicated Work or HP gets out of the engine to the crankshaft.  Some of the HP is used up in forms which can be grouped under the title of "Friction" which include: 
Where HP is lost to Friction: 
• 
Rubbing, mechanical friction from piston rings rubbing on the bore, bearings rubbing on journals, lifters rubbing on cam lobes, etc. 

• 
Required accessories like oil pump, water pump, cooling fan, etc.  (The cam and valve train could be included under this category.) 


Rubbing and accessory friction can be illustrated by removing the spark plugs, putting a torque wrench on the crankshaft bolt and turning the engine by hand.  The torque required to turn the engine represents torque which could be used to power the vehicle if the engine had no friction.   
The work or power lost to friction is called Friction Work or Friction HP and the work which actually appears at the crankshaft is called Brake Work or Brake HP.  See Figure A.2. 
        Brake HP = Indicated HP - Friction HP 

The HP lost to friction can also be expressed as an efficiency: 
Mechanical Efficiency = Brake HP                                                Indicated HP 
Mechanical Efficiencies can be in the range of .00 (0%) up to .90 (90%) or higher. A good illustration of Mech Eff % = .00 is when an engine is idling, clutch disengaged or transmission in neutral.  All the HP being generated by the fuel and the "explosions" in the cylinders are producing no Brake HP at the crankshaft.  This fuel is being completely wasted, just to overcome the engine's own friction and keep it running. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Multiplying the Thermal Efficiency and the Mechanical Efficiency together is a better way of describing the "Eff" term in the previous equations:
        Eff = Thermal Eff % x Mech Eff % 
Substituting this relationship into equation (7) you finally get the formula for HP of an engine: 
(8)HP out = CID x RPM x Vol Eff% x .00001326 x C.E.F. x TEFF % x MEFF % A/F 2544 
Combining all the constants together, (assuming 14.6 A/F and dividing twice by 100 so Thermal Efficiency and Mechanical Efficiency can be in percents) you get: 
Detailed Equation for HP of a 4 Cycle, I.C. Engine 
(9) HP out = CID x RPM x VOLEFF% x C.E.F. x TEFF % x MEFF % 28 E12 
Note: 28 E12 is "scientific notation" for 28,000,000,000,000.  Your calculator will probably not let you enter 28,000,000,000,000, so use the "scientific notation"  method. 
Now, for the important stuff; “What is equation (9) telling us?”  It's telling us that to make more HP (to raise the value of the left side of the equation) you must raise the value of something on the right side of the equation.  Listed below are these factors from the right side of the equation with some explanation, and a list of some specifications from the Engine Analyzer which effect that particular factor. 
CID: The cubic inch displacement of the engine: 
Bore, inches 
Stroke, inches 
# Of cylinders 
RPM: The engine speed: 
Stroke (the shorter the stroke, the higher the RPM limit) Rod length (the longer the rod, the lower the piston Gs) Anything which lightens reciprocating components extends safe RPM limit. Other short block specs which affect strength of rotating components Valve Train Specs which allow high revving without valve toss 
VOLEFF%: Volumetric efficiency: 
Most cylinder Head(s) Specs             Most Intake System Specs             All Exhaust System Specs             All Cam Specs Most Supercharger Specs             Weather Conditions and Nitrous Oxide under Running Conditions  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
C.E.F.: Chemical Energy of the Fuel: 
            Gasoline/Alcohol Possibly Nitrous Oxide 
[Note: This is where alcohol and nitro-methane burning engines make additional power over gas engines.  When burned, these fuels release more energy per pound of air than gasoline.  Nitrous oxide, on the other hand, is only a way to get more oxygen into the cylinder so more fuel can be burned.  Technically, nitrous oxide is improving VE % by supplying "air" with more oxygen (for example 30%) rather than the 21% oxygen typical of normal air.]
 TEFF %: Thermal efficiency: 
Compression Ratio Spark Advance Specs Piston Coatings Combustion Chamber Design and Coating Cylinder Head Material 
MEFF %: Mechanical efficiency: 
Most Short Block Specs             Coolant Temp (effects oil temp and therefore oil viscosity) Supercharger Specs (for centrifugal or Roots type, belt driven superchargers) 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 


Appendix 3: Intake and Exhaust Tuning 
Intake Inertia Tuning 
The intake process of a 4-cycle engine is a cyclic process.  During the intake stroke, the piston accelerates a column of fresh air from rest to speeds of up to 1000 ft/sec and then back to rest in only a few thousandths of a second.  Decelerating the inertia of this column of air at intake valve closing results in high pressures at the intake valve.  This high pressure forces additional fresh charge into the cylinder, like a supercharger, resulting in higher volumetric efficiency and torque.  This condition is called inertia tuning. See Figure A.3. 

A good analogy of inertia tuning is the "water hammer" effect in old plumbing when you quickly close a running faucet.  (New plumbing has "trapped air shock absorbers" to reduce this effect.)  Decelerating the column of water in the pipes by closing the valve causes a sharp pressure rise that literally "rattle the pipes".  This is the same situation as when the intake valve closes.   
Inertia tuning is responsible for an increase in volumetric efficiency and torque over a broad RPM range.  See Figure A.4.  Inertia tuning is optimum when the rise in intake runner pressure is high over a broad range of the valve opening period, especially around intake valve closing.  This usually occurs when In Tune Prs is highest in the RPM data test results.  See Example 4.5. 
Intake Resonance Tuning 
Once the intake valve has closed, this pressure pulsation continues to be reflected back and forth in the intake runner until the intake valve opens and the process starts again.  If a high pressure peak of this reflected wave is at the intake valve during valve overlap, it can blow the burnt exhaust gasses out of the clearance volume into the exhaust.  This results in additional gains in volumetric efficiency. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
However, if a vacuum peak arrives at the intake valve during overlap, additional exhaust gasses will be drawn into the intake runner.  This process hurts volumetric efficiency since the cylinder must first draw in that "blown back" exhaust from the intake runner before it starts to induct the fresh, power producing air charge.  The timing of this reflected wave to aid scavenging is called resonance tuning. 

For typical runner lengths (6-20 inches) and RPMs (3000-10000 RPM), the resonant pressure wave is reflected several times between intake strokes.  Therefore, at some RPMs positive intake tuning occurs and negative tuning occurs at other RPMs.  Resonance tuning is responsible for the "wiggle" seen in torque curves for engines with high valve overlap.  For engines with low overlap, resonant tuning has much less effect.  Also, each time this wave is reflected it looses some strength, so at lower RPMs or for shorter runner lengths resonance tuning is negligible.  The Engine Analyzer detailed tuning simulations will show  these gains or losses in volumetric efficiency and performance for resonance tuning. 
Exhaust Resonance Tuning 
Things are much more violent in the exhaust runner due to the sudden rush of high pressure exhaust out the exhaust valve when it first opens.  In fact most of the exhaust is expelled during this first rush called "blow down".  That leaves relatively little for the piston to push out during the exhaust stroke. 
Due to this violent "blow down", exhaust tuning is not significantly affected by the previous cycle as in intake resonance tuning.  Exhaust resonance tuning is caused by the reflections of the "blow down" pulse in the exhaust runner while the exhaust valve is open.  If one of the negative, vacuum pulses arrives at the exhaust valve during overlap, it benefits performance by: 
• 
Clearing out the cylinder of any residual exhaust to reduce “contamination” of the fresh incoming intake charge. 

• 
Preventing reversion by keeping the exhaust flowing out of the cylinder and the intake charge flowing into the cylinder. 

• 
Letting the intake charge get a “head start” at filling the cylinder, because the exhaust is sucking the intake charge into the cylinder before the piston has moved enough to suck the intake charge into the cylinder. 


With high overlap camshafts and good resonance tuning on the intake side, it is possible to completely scavenge the clearance volume of residual exhaust.  This provides for very high volumetric efficiencies, and possibly "short circuiting".  Short circuiting is when fresh intake charge passes directly through the clearance volume out the exhaust during overlap.  Obviously this wastes fuel, but to produce optimum power that may not be important. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
As on the intake side, exhaust resonance tuning will produce torque gains when a vacuum pulse arrives at the exhaust valve during overlap. However, a torque loss will be produced when a positive pulse arrives. 
As runner velocities increase (smaller pipe diameters), the shape of the exhaust pulses change. 
• 
The primary blowdown pulse gets wider and the arrival of the 1st vacuum pulse gets delayed. 

• 
The amplitude (height) of the blowdown pulse gets higher and generally the suction of the 1st vacuum pulse gets stronger also. 


Therefore, the combination of pipe length and diameter are important to determine what pipe should be used for a particular applications. At Performance Trends we are still trying to better understand the details of intake and exhaust tuning.  As we improve our understanding and capabilities, we will add these improvements to our software. 
Additional Factors Affecting Tuning: 
All tuning factors are affected by temperature, since temperature affects the speed of sound.  The speed of sound in the runner influences how fast the pulsation’s are reflected.  Since temperatures are affected by so many factors not simulated by the Engine Analyzer, tuning effects can only be estimates. 
The pulsation’s produced by other cylinders can affect tuning pulsation’s.  This is especially true at points where neither the intake or exhaust are at peak tuning, or "off design" points.  These influences from other cylinders are simulated only very simply by the Engine Analyzer. 
Low restriction runners (high Runner Flow Effcies) provide better tuning effects.  However, the exact relationship between Runner Flow Effcy and tuning strength is not completely developed.  Therefore, you are advised to try a range of Runner Flow Coefs for your simulation.  For example, if you measure a Runner Flow Effcy to be 85%, also try the calculations at 80% and 90%.  If performance changes significantly, you know tuning is critical.  However, you are not guaranteed that the estimated performance at Runner Flow Effcy = 85% is the best estimate of the engine's actual performance.   
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 



Appendix 4: "Fine Tuning" Torque & HP Curves 
The Engine Analyzer was primarily designed to illustrate basic Internal Combustion Engine Theory and give estimates of the "pay back" of certain engine modifications.  See Appendix 1.  If you are using the Engine Analyzer program to help you make the right decisions for modifying a particular engine and you have dynamometer performance data for that engine, you should first get the Engine Analyzer calculated results to agree with the dynamometer data.  The suggestions which follow will help "dial in" the engine specifications to match your dynamometer data.  These suggestions will also help you tune your engine to give a desired torque or HP at a desired RPM. 
Also check Example 4.5 and Appendix 3 for how to adjust tuning effects, which can dramatically alter the torque and HP curve. 
When creating any engine file for a particular engine, it is best to start with an existing file which most closely resembles that engine.  Then modify all the specifications to match that engine for the things which you can measure or you know for certain. 
For other specifications like Runner Flow Effcy, Exh System CFM Rating, etc you may not have data to make a calculation.  Estimate these values as best you can from the tables or equations provided in Chapter 2.  Calculate performance and compare the Engine Analyzer's results with your engine's actual dynamometer results (or desired torque and HP objectives). 
First, compare the Engine Analyzer's secondary information (not Brk Tq and Brake HP) to that which has been measured on the dynamometer, i.e. air flow (Actual CFM), fuel flow (Fuel Flow),  friction HP (Friction HP), intake vacuum (Int Vacuum), exhaust back pressure (Exh Pres) and Mach #. 
Actual CFM: 
Actual CFM is the volume of air flowing into the engine.  If the dynamometer data has air flow readings, try to match its CFM readings to those of the Engine Analyzer.  Most dynamometer equipment reads out directly in Actual CFM. 
Actual CFM air flow can be increased by several means, depending on the RPM where the increase is needed. 
   To increase Actual CFM at low RPM (with little effect at higher RPM): 
• 
Change Intake Heat to Less or None to allow less heat to be transferred to the intake charge 

• 
Reduce Coolant Temp  to allow less heat to be transferred to the intake charge 

• 
Specify a smaller turbo or higher belt ratio (if boost limited and supercharged) 

• 
Adjust Runner Flow Effcies to alter strength of tuning 


   To increase Actual CFM at high RPM (with little effect at lower RPM): 
• 
Reduce any intake or exhaust flow restrictions, or increase flow ratings, for example Carb CFM Rating, Runner Flow Effcy, Exh System CFM Rating, etc.  

• 
Adjust Runner Flow Effcies to alter strength of tuning 

• 
Decrease Exhaust Header Diameter bring Ex AvgVel up to 300 ft/sec to exhaust increase exhaust inertia tuning 

• 
Increase Roots Supercharger Volume/Revolution, Belt Ratio, Turbo or Centrifugal CFM at Pk Effcy, and other Supercharger specs if the engine is supercharged.  


   To increase Actual CFM at low RPM and reduce Actual CFM at high RPM: 
• 
Increase Total Cam Advance or Lash @ Valve 

• 
Decrease most any of the cam specs, especially Intake Duration 

• 
Decrease intake or exhaust Valve Flow Effcy for Valve Diameter  

• 
Specify longer length and smaller diameter intake and exhaust runners 

• 
Adjust Runner Flow Effcies to alter strength of tuning 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
   To increase Actual CFM in the mid range: 
• 
Specify Secondary Throttles as No 

• 
Increase intake Runner Flow Effcy to produce more flow where In InertiaPrs is already high 

• 
Adjust Runner Flow Effcies to alter strength of tuning 


Fuel Flow: 
Fuel flow will generally follow air flow (Actual CFM) if the A/F is constant.  If the dynamometer data includes fuel flow in lbs/hr and an actual A/F measurement based on exhaust gas analysis, calculate dynamometer air flow as follows: 
Dyno Actual CFM = Dyno Fuel Flow (lb/hr) x Dyno A/F x .218 
Now you can use the Actual CFM rules to make dynamometer and Engine Analyzer air flows match. 
If the dynamometer data does not include a measured A/F, then assume your engine is running at 12.5, just as the Engine Analyzer assumes.  Use the same rules as listed under Actual CFM to get the Engine Analyzer fuel flow to match the dynamometer fuel flow.  For example, if the Engine Analyzer's results need more fuel in the midrange to match the dynamometer results, try specifying Secondary Throttles as No as listed under "To increase Actual CFM in the mid range". 
Friction HP: 
If the dynamometer your engine is tested on can "motor" the engine (spin the engine over at high speed with spark and fuel off), the dynamometer data should include the measured motoring friction HP.  This data should be taken with oil and coolant at operating temperature and WOT (wide open throttle).  If this data is available, multiply the Engine Analyzer's  Friction HP by 1.3 to account for some pumping work HP.  Then compare it to the dynamometer motoring HP.   
For example, if the dynamometer results show 45 HP of motoring friction at 4000 RPM, and the Engine Analyzer shows 22 Friction HP: 
   Example of Engine Analyzer Friction HP vs. Friction Measured on Dynamometer Estimate of Engine Analyzer motoring friction: 
22 F HP x 1.3 = 29 HP estimated motoring friction 
Actual dynamometer motoring friction: 45 HP 
Difference = 45 HP - 28 HP = 17 HP 
The Engine Analyzer needs 17 HP more friction to match the dynamometer data. 
To increase Friction HP, increase any of the Losses specs in the Short Block Specs menu, like   Accessories, etc. 
Int Vacuum: 
To the Engine Analyzer, Int Vacuum is the intake vacuum after the carb or throttle body during the intake stroke.  Intake vacuum measurements on a dynamometer are an average over all 4 strokes.  Therefore, dynamometer data will (and should) show a lower 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
vacuum than the Engine Analyzer's results, especially for individual runner intakes or engines with less than 3 cylinders.  However, if the dynamometer data shows more vacuum than the Engine Analyzer, you may want to increase the Engine Analyzer's vacuum by reducing Carburetor or Throttle Body CFM Rating in the Intake System menu. 
Exh Pres: 
Exh Pres is calculated by the Engine Analyzer so as to correlate well with dynamometer exhaust pressure measurements.  If the dynamometer data shows more pressure than the Engine Analyzer, you may want to increase the Engine Analyzer's back pressure by reducing Exh System CFM Rating.   
Mach # 
Although you can not measure Mach # with a dynamometer test, it can be measured on a flow bench.  Accurate flow bench data will give accurate flow coefficients, which are key for accurate Mach #s. 
Without significant tuning effects, severely restrictive runners, carb or exhaust system, the Mach # primarily dictates torque and HP peaks. The torque peak will occur at a Mach # of approximately .4 and the HP peak at a Mach # of about .55.  For example: 
Example of Adjusting Torque Peak Using Mach # 
The dynamometer data show (or you require) a torque peak at 5500 RPM 
The Engine Analyzer calculates a Mach # of .48 at 5500 RPM 
You should try to lower the Mach # to .4 at 5500 by providing: 
• 
More intake cam duration or lift 

• 
Larger intake valve area (increase Valve Diameter or # Valves/Cylinder) 

• 
Improved intake air flow (increase Intake Valve or Intake Runner Flow Effcy) 

• 
Decrease Bore or Stroke for the same size head 


Brk Tq and Brake HP: 
If you match up the secondary information as shown previously, ideally the torque and HP will automatically match.  However, it is not an ideal world or perhaps some secondary information is not available from the dynamometer data.  Therefore you are left with matching dynamometer brake torque and HP with Brk Tq and Brake HP from the Engine Analyzer. 
Since torque and HP are largely a function of air flow, follow the rules outlined under the Actual CFM category.  That is, if the Engine Analyzer needs more torque at low RPM, apply the rules under "To increase Actual CFM at low RPM (with little effect at higher RPM):", for example "Set Intake Heat to Less or None". 
Another factor which has a large impact on Brk Tq and Brake HP is Friction HP.  If the Engine Analyzer results show significantly more HP at higher RPM, try increasing Friction HP as discussed previously. 
Look through all 22 rows of the RPM data. Three factors which effect performance, but not necessarily air flow include: 
• 
A/F Mix Qal being less than 100%, especially at low RPM, reduces the engine’s thermal efficiency (ability to burn the fuel efficiently).  Reduce runner sizes, valve sizes, Octane (which program assumes affects vapor pressure), carburetor size, or specify Secondary Throttles, etc. 

• 
Valve Toss or Lifter Pump-up indicated as Moderate or Extreme will significantly reduce power at high RPM.  Avoid this by specifying less aggressive cam ramps (less Lobe Lift for the same duration), less Rocker Arm Ratio, or a better Valve Train rating. 

• 
Spark Adv can be retarded to avoid spark knock or detonation.  Look for asterisk (*) at different Spark Adv readings to see if spark has been retarded from what the engine wants to run.  If so, you may need to increase Octane, lower Compression Ratio, lower Coolant Temp, etc. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
An excellent tool to understand the Engine Analyzer’s output and find potential problems with a combination is the Analysis Report.  See Section 3.1 and Example 4.5. 
Differences in Dynamometer Testing Methods: 
Variations in dynamometer testing procedures can produce significant differences in measured torque and HP.  Some dynamometer tests try to simulate actual vehicle installations, but most go for "maximum possible HP".  The table below shows differences between typical vehicle installation and dynamometer installation for various Engine Analyzer specifications. 
The Running Conditions for engine files reflecting vehicle installations use the SAE (Society of Automobile Engineers) standard weather conditions for rating engine power, per SAE Procedure J-1349.  However, dynamometer tests going for "maximum possible HP" for racing engines use a different set of standard conditions which result in approximately 4% more power.  These "Other Std Conditions" are also typical of the dynamometer conditions used in the 60s by the automobile manufacturers, which tended to "overrate" an engine's power. 
Then we have Chassis Dynamometers, where the power is measured at the tires.  These dynos will measure 10-30 % less than a pure engine dyno because of losses through the drivetrain and the tires as they slip on the rollers.  Even though the tires are not “smoking”, they are slipping, from 3-10%.  This slippage and any torque converter slippage (at least at higher RPM where the converter has “coupled”) are direct losses in power. A 10% converter slippage is a 10% power loss.  Then there are all the additional losses of full vehicle accessories, trans and rear axle friction losses, etc.   
However, some chassis dynos do math corrections trying to compensate for these losses.  Depending on how they correct, you may actually see more power measured on a chassis dyno than the engine actually puts out.  The important thing with chassis dynos is to know what that particular dyno is reporting for power, and any corrections being made. 
Table Showing the Difference Between Typical Vehicle and Dynamometer Installations 
Engine Analyzer Specs  Vehicle  Dynamometer  

Engine Specifications  
Accessories  All vehicle accessories installed  Minimum accessories, including no water pump and no fan  
Intake Heat  Production  Probably blocked exhaust crossover, and coolant temp is lowered for better torque  
Exh Header/Manifold  Actual Manifold  Aftermarket Exhaust Headers  
Exh System CFM Rating  Actual Exhaust system or a restriction to simulate the exhaust system restriction  No exhaust system, Open headers  

Weather Conditions  SAE Conditions  Std Dyno Conditions  
Intake Air Temp  77  60  
Dew Point  49 (approx 36% relative humidity)  0 (completely dry air)  
Baro Pres  29.6  29.92  
Elevation, ft  0  0  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Appendix 5: New Features in Version 3.2 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.2: 
• 
Program is now a 32 bit version, fully compatible with newer operating systems, starting with Windows, 95, then 98, Me, XP, and 2000. This also allows you to use much longer, more descriptive file names for saving vehicles, suspensions and engines. It is also more compatible with newer printers. 

• 
The program is now designed for 600 x 800 or higher resolution screens.  Screen colors are also more compatible with Windows XP. 

• 
The graph screen is now larger, and generally fills the entire screen. 

• 
There is now a separate “Examples” folder for example engine files provided by Performance Trends. New engines which you save will be saved to a separate folder. 

• 
File commands to save a vehicle file to a floppy disk, or open a vehicle file from a floppy disk.  This allows easy transfer of files from one computer to another. 

• 
You can now choose to list engine files alphabetically (as normally done) or by saved date, with the most recently saved files listed first. This should make it easier to find recent files more quickly. 

• 
New Example Engines have been added, like Crate Engines. 

• 
The user’s manual is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Display User’s Manual. The manual is in a high quality PDF format  

• 
The Performance Trends website is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Performance Trends on the Web.  

• 
Several features have been added to make the process of picking example components, calculating performance, making comparison graphs faster.  Once an example has been selected on an input specification has been changed, the <F5> key lets you progress toward calculating performance and making a graph.  Then the <Esc> key backs you up to the same point as where you started.  This is explained in more detail below. 

• 
The program now remembers the point where you picked an example component, so if you choose to pick another, it will default to the last component chosen. 

• 
The ‘Flow Efficiency’ of the ports can now be calculated from up to 3 flow/lift points. 

• 
The calculation accuracy has been “tweaked”.  Most evident changes are: 

• 
Low RPM torque is higher for some engine combos. 

• 
Spark knock simulation is improved for more realistic trade-offs between knock, octane and power loss from spark retard. 

• 
The required spark advance for a particular engine has been improved.  

• 
Revised the BSAC calculation to be more consistent with fuel flow (not change so significantly 'with weather conditions as done in earlier v3.0). 

• 
Very Rich gas as fuel option to help to reduce detonation. 

• 
On program shut down, the program now asks if you want your changes saved to the “Library Copy” of the file you are working with.  

• 
Several features have been added to the graphs, including: 

• 
The Graph cursor now interpolates between points.  This means that if one power curve has results at 2000, 2400 and 2800 RPM, and another has results at 2000, 2500 and 3000, the cursor will read both curves at all RPM points you ran, 2000, 2400, 2500, 2800 and 3000. 

• 
TDC and BDC labels are now displayed on the Valve Lift graphs.  If you are using a cursor, the cursor value is also given as, say “24 deg ABDC”. 

• 
You can now print graphs in color or B&W with various styles of dashed lines. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
• 
A Preference lets you turn off the Graph always AutoScaling a new graph.  This means that if you have found a set of scales you like, the program will maintain them. 

• 
The powerful ‘Optimize’ feature at the main screen lets you try thousands of combinations of critical engine specs to find the best combo automatically. 

• 
Hundreds of new example parts have been added, including the entire Crane Cams Catalog, Brodix, AFR, Edelbrock, World Products, Dart and TFS heads, more Import parts, motorcycle parts and kart parts, and more. 

• 
New Printing options for reports, including different Font Sizes and omitting the “Starting Point Suggestions” for cam and runner dimensions (in Preferences).  “Starting Point Suggestions” are now done much better through the “Optimize” feature. 

• 
New Printing options for graphs, including “Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment”, Width adjustments and more (in Preferences).   

• 
Comments can be saved with each component, describing it in some detail. 

• 
Version 3.0 let you send a power curve to a vehicle program to be loaded and run in that vehicle.  Version  3.2 lets you do that also.  However, that process requires several key strokes and time.  Version 3.2 lets you “Auto-Link” with a vehicle program of your choosing.  Auto-Link runs every power curve you produce through a vehicle program, and produces a summary of the results.  Now you can instantly see how a cam change, head swap, more nitrous will affect ET or circle track Lap Times.  At the time of printing this manual, Auto-Link was only available for the Drag Racing Analyzer v3.2 and Circle Track Analyzer v3.2. 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 



Figure A3 Optimize Screen to Have Program Try Hundreds of Combinations Automatically to Find the Best One 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Figure A4 <F5> and <Esc> Keys for Quicker Calculations and Graphs Follow steps 1-8 

Note: You can just start at step 2, change a component spec setting, press <F5> twice to get a graph, then press <Esc> twice to return to the component menu to make another change.  You may want to adjust Preference and Graph settings to make this process more streamlined. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Figure A5 New Graph Features 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 





Appendix 6: New Features in Version 3.4 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.4: 
General Operation: 
• 
The program now requires you to 'Allow' it to run in Vista and Windows 7 (same as right click on desktop icon, then select 'Run As Administrator').  This should make the program more Vista and Windows 7 compatible. 

• 
You can now save a graphics picture file with engine data, which could be a picture of your car or engine.  This picture appears on the main screen, and can be printed out with graphs and reports, or just separately from the main screen.  Fig A 9, A 23. 

• 
We’ve added a global switch to turn Off or On the Intro Help Tips in Preferences.  Fig A 24. 


Short Block: 
• 
We’ve added hundreds of combinations of bore, stroke and rod length examples. 

• 
We’ve increased the size of the Comments box for all components, to allow you  to better describe your changes.  This is 


common to all Component Screens.  Fig A 24. Heads: 
• 
We’ve added the ability to import flow files from Port Flow Analyzer.  Plus version only. 

• 
You can now import head files from some Desktop Dyno (tm) and Dyno Sim (tm) programs and those available from Stan 


Weiss, .flw and .dfw files.  Fig A 14, A 19. Intake/Exhaust: 
• 
A picture explaining the definition of primary pipe length and collector length is available in the Exhaust System Specs screen. 

• 
The program now shows pictures of intake manifold and exhaust manifold/header types, to more clearly explain the choices. Cam/Valve Train: 

• 
We’ve added a new screen to let you do Variable Cam Timing (VVT).  Plus Version Only.  Fig A 13. 

• 
Dwell over Nose (Cheater profile) can now be more exactly defined, to the nearest 2 degree increment.  Also, now this setting can be different on the intake vs the exhaust.  Plus version only.   Fig A 14. 

• 
The program now allows for using a Ramp Rating for the cam profile for more exact cam profiles.  There is also a ‘Clc’ screen to calculate the ramp rating to match certain duration specs at either .200 lift or seat timing.  Plus version only. Fig A 14, A 15. 

• 
We’ve added hundreds of new Example Cam Categories (especially Imports and Motorcycles) and cams themselves.  Many are stock engine cam files from John Holm.  Many thanks John. 

• 
The screen for opening std Engine Analyzer Example components now let you select to only show components which match up to 3 criteria you have selected at the bottom of the screen.  Fig A 16. 

• 
We’ve added option to import Other Format Files for Cam files, like .cam and .scm files from Desktop Dyno (tm) and DynoSim (tm).  Fig A 18. 

• 
The screen for opening Example Cams now show the Gross Valve Lift and Lobe Separation for the cam you selected if you right click on the selected cam.  Fig A 16. 

• 
We’ve added an “Optimize Using These Cams” button in the Example Cams screen.  The program will run each cam you’ve selected in the Example Cams screen and display the 4 cams which best meet your “Optimize” criteria.  Fig A 16, A 17. 

• 
When you change Lobe Separation in the Cam Specs screen, now the program adjusts the centerlines correctly.   

• 
We’ve added a “Clc” button for Lobe Lift being calculated from Gross Valve Lift and Rocker Arm Ratio.  We’ve also added a “Clc” button for Lobe Separation.  Fig A 15. 

• 
Cam Advance can now go from 30 Retard to 30 Advance 

• 
We’ve made some refinements to the Cam Profiles created by the EA Pro to more precisely time them to the nearest 0.1 deg. 

• 
We’ve added .053" lift for rating events (like Harley Davidson cams).  Fig A 14. Turbo/Supercharger: 

• 
The Roots Supercharger type now allows for an Intercooler.  Fig A 19. Calculation Conditions: 

• 
Program now has Fuel Option of E85.  Plus Version Only.  Fig A 20. 

• 
Program now displays the Typical Octane for various fuel types.  Fig A 20. Calculations: 

• 
We’ve increased the Piston Speed limit above which program says is Impossibly High because materials and technology have made huge strides over recent years.   

• 
Idle vacuum now more precisely estimated for super/turbocharger type and size.   

• 
The program now better checks for blank inputs before doing calculations.   


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
ASCII Data Files: 
• 
We’ve added a Browse button to screen for writing ASCII files of test results.  Fig A 21. 

• 
We’ve added an option to include the Special Calculations section for writing ASCII files of test results.  Plus Version Only. 


Fig A 21. Graphs: 
• 
Program now has an “Edit Printed Graph” command under Format.  It opens a screen where you have several options on how to print your graph, include various comments, etc.  You can now select to include the torque and HP data in a table when you print out RPM data graphs as long as there are torque and/or HP data on the graph.  Plus Version Only.  Fig A 22, A 23. 

• 
Program now has larger Legend Text sizes available (under Format) on graph screen.  Fig A 23. 

• 
Program now prints cursor and cursor values when you print a graph.  Fig A 23. 

• 
We’ve added additional graph scale multiplier for Special Graph types of x 1000.   Printouts: 

• 
We’ve refined the printouts to look better and be more compatible with more types of printers.  Fig A 23.   

• 
The program now better remembers Printer Changes and Printer Type. 

• 
You can now print a Company Logo graphics files on reports and graphs.  This info is loaded in the Preferences screen.  You can specify 2 lines of text which can appear at the top of printouts of reports and graphs in the Preferences screen, under Printing/Graphing.  Plus version only.  Fig A 23, A 24. 

• 
The program is now better at finding more versions of Acrobat and Reader for a printer choice. 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 








Figure A 16 New Features for Picking Example Components, Many Especially for Cams 


Click on this button (only available for example Cams) and the program will optimize trying each example cam shown. See Figure A 17. 

In this section, you can choose to Show… ‘All Examples’ or ‘Only These’ as shown. Then you can use the 3 groups of conditions to determine what examples are shown. For example, in this screen, we have picked to only show cams with the phrase “Hyd” in the Lifter Profile description and an Intake Lobe Duration from 220 to 230 degrees. Now this screen will only 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Figure A 17 Optimizing Example Cams, as Described in Figure A 16 

If you click on the “Optimize Using These Cams” button as shown in Figure A 16, instructions for using this screen are displayed here. Basically you pick what you want to optimize (Max Peak Tq, etc), pick an Idle Vacuum level, and then click on the Start Optimizing button. 

The program will show the 4 best cams which meet your criteria. Pick one of these 4 using the round option button, then click on the “Keep New Settings” button to load in this Example Cam. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Figure A 18 Loading Cam Files from Other Company’s Programs 


When finished, you will have a new Category in the “Examples Added by User” section. Now you can open up this Category to see all the Cams and use all the features as described in Figure A 16. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 






(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Figure A 24 New Preferences  Engine Analyzer  Appendixes  
This section “Program Title Comments” is available only in the Plus version, and lets you specify 2 lines of text and some graphics file (typically a company logo) to appear at the top of your printouts (reports and graphs).  
New buttons to turn Off or turn On all intro help tips.  

Appendix 7: New Features in Version 3.4B 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.4B: 
Accuracy: 
Several refinements to the performance calculations have been made.  We have also added a Preference “Use v3.4B Performance Calculations” where you can choose to use these new calculations, or revert back to the calculations very similar to used in v3.4A. The program has added Direct Injection option for Combustion Chamber design  The program now more realistically simulates cam profiles for OHC valve trains. 
The program has about 100 more example Complete Engine files. The program has hundreds more example components, like Heads and Camshafts.  GM LS Cams and Heads are now a separate category. 
The program now shows "Peak Int. Sec. Tune RPM" in the Special Calculations section so you can see if the program is simulating 
Secondary Intake Tuning Effects.   New Roots type superchargers have been added similar to those in Engine Analyzer Pro:  Modern Screw Type and Modern 2000+ Screw Type. 
When reading Engine Analyzer Pro files, the program now better determines the individual port flow efficiencies when the file has a 
full flow curve. The program has updated the Piston Speed recommendations in the Analyze Performance reports.  AnalysisReport.txt is now done in Notepad for easier reading, printing, editing, copying, etc for the user.  The Analysis Report also has an improved header for printouts.   
Operation: 
The program will now more reliably open your default internet browser to accessing the internet. Fixed bug where canceling from printing to a PDF printer could cause program to stop.   The Preview when opening a Saved File now includes more info about the engine. The method for displaying a PDF file (like the User Manual) has been updated to be more compatible with more operating systems. The method for opening a file or page on the internet has been updated to be more compatible with more operating systems.   The program has eliminated repeating error messages, or repetitive questions about printing in landscape vs portrait orientation. The program now keeps the Case (upper and lower) of the Graph Titles from History Log.  This way what you enter will be displayed 
correctly on graphs. 
The Graph menu items of Background Color, Grid Style, and labels for valve lift graphs to include TDC, BDC, are now properly marked with check marks for the current setting. There is a new Preference “Use Larger Fonts on Output Grid”  that lets you increase font size for calculations output data table.  The 
Special Calculations section font has been changed to Courier New to allow for changing font size. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Many Help screens are now shown in Notepad so you can save or print them.  Prior to this, they would be displayed on 1 or more separate screens without any options like printing. Files and folders you delete are now actually sent to the Recycle Bin so they can be recovered later if you want.   Features have been added so input screens can be resized and the size and location is remembered for next time the screen is open. You can now stop displaying the Opening Warning screen when you start the program with a check box for “Don’t show this again”. Several screens have been increased in size to allow for longer file names, and to accommodate higher screen resolutions. 
The program can now open newer versions of Engine Analyzer Pro files. The program will now display all columns in History Log.  Prior to this the columns of “Graph?” and “Graph Title” were sometimes hidden. 
The program now allows Graph File Names up to 30 characters long. A bug was fixed where the software would check for reasonable lash settings even if the cam was Hydraulic prior to calculations.   Now the list of Example components is not updated if the criteria box for searching is blank. For example, if you have requested to 
look for Duration less than some amount, but the text box for the amount is blank, the example list is not updated.  This can make the process of searching for examples more efficient and quicker. 
The program now explains why you can not open very old files from Engine Analyzer Pro, rather than just not opening them.   The Program now checks the configuration file after it is written and makes a backup copy. If a problem is sensed in the configuration file the next time the program starts, the backup configuration file is used.   
The program has a bug fixed which avoids problems opening History Log on VERY high resolution screens.   Changed Preference "Main Screen Enlarged to Fill Screen" to "Main Screen Fonts Increase w Screen Size".  Now you can also resize and reposition the main screen and it is remembered the next time you start the program.  If you set this Preference to No, then the 
fonts will stay the original size, but the picture area will be large. If you set this Preference to Yes, then the fonts will grow in size, but the picture area will stay relatively small. The program has a new Preference "Allow Input Screens to be Resized" to let you resize and reposition the component screens, like 
Short Block, Heads, etc. The size and position is remembered each time you open a screen, and the next time you start the program. 
Set this to No (the default) and the screens stay relatively small, stay in their default positions, and can be faster loading. The default Font Size on the main screen is now larger to show up better on higher resolution screens, even without changing any Preferences. 
The program has removed 2 Preferences:  “Beginner User” setting and the option to not "Show Open/Close Events in Cam Specs".  Most users wanted Experienced User features and the program to show the Cam Events. There is now a "Make Microsoft Excel File" option for creating ASCII files from the calculated results.   
Optimize Feature, Plus Version Only: 
Several changes to the Optimize feature have been made, so that more accurate answers can be found for more possible combinations.  For example, the program now assumes the optimum cam durations are larger if the RPM range for the calculations is high. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
An Optimize option of "Only Check Cam Specs close to the original Specs" has been added.  If the program's standard "Optimize" feature can not find optimum Cam Specs, turn on this option and the program may better find them. 
When Optimizing, a display of “Valve Toss” or “Lifter Pump Up” for the combinations found has been added.  This can help explain why an Optimum combination could not be found. 
When Optimizing both Cam Duration and Lift, the lifts have been reduced some to be more realistic for typical cams. 
If Optimize can not find better performance than the engine's original settings, the info message gives suggestions for changes to be made for it to work better at optimizing. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Figure B.02 Main Screen Fonts Increase w Screen Size 
Set to No 
Even set to No, the fonts are larger than in v3.4A 
When you change this Preference, you will get this message. Restart the program to see the true effect. 
Set to Yes. 
Picture screen remains small 
Fonts for most all items are much larger. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 










Engine Analyzer ‘Plus’ Features Supplement 

PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. 
Check DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES and LIMITATION OF LIABILITY at the beginning of the manual. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Engine Analyzer ‘Plus’ Features 
The Engine Analyzer Plus is a package of features the owners of the standard Engine Analyzer can add to their program.  This package can be added either at the time of the original purchase or after they have purchased a standard program.  See Figure 1 for obtaining information, activating your ‘Plus’ version, or running a demo of the ‘Plus’ features. 

Major Features: 
• 
Calculate up to 20 RPMs. 

• 
Calculate performance for alternate fuels like Diesel, propane or CNG (compressed natural gas). 

• 
Estimate Piston-to-Valve Clearance. 

• 
More graphing features. 

• 
The ‘Optimize’ feature which lets you pick and modify most any engine specs and watch the effect on the torque and power curve right on the screen.  This is great for quickly finding which specs have the most effect on your engine’s performance. 

• 
Use Full Flow Curve for cylinder head ports (New to Version 3.2) 

• 
Use Millimeters (instead of inches) to enter engine dimensions  (New to Version 3.2) 

• 
Hide certain calculated output that you think is not important  (New to Version 3.2) 

• 
Choose different colors for graph lines, which can also effect the print quality when printing color graphs.  (New to Version 3.2) 

• 
Duration at .200” lift is displayed in the Cam Specs for the particular lobe you have specified.  (New to Version 3.2)  


Check 11 new features added in Calculate More RPMs v3.4, starting on page 214.Alternate Fuels 
These 2 features are available in the Running Conditions screen.  There, you can increase 'Number of RPMs' to calculate up to 20 for more detailed power curves.  See Figure 2. 
There are also many additional 'Fuel Types':  
1. 
Propane (lo-pres. gas) is a typical vapor propane system.  If you specify a Carburetor in the Intake System specs, the program assumes you will use a venturi type of 'mixer', which usually has to be fairly small (restrictive with low CFM rating) to work correctly.  If you specify an EFI system, the program assumes you are injecting propane vapor, which does not require the restrictive 'mixer'.  

2. 
Propane (hi-pres. liquid 'LPG') is a special high pressure, liquid injection EFI system. 

3. 
Natural gas (methane or CNG) is a typical vapor methane system.  If you specify a Carburetor in the Intake System specs, the program assumes you will use a venturi type of 'mixer', which usually has to be fairly small (restrictive with low CFM rating) to work correctly.  If you specify an EFI system, the program assumes you are injecting methane vapor, which does not require the restrictive 'mixer'. 

4. 
Truck Diesel (prod w low smoke) is a typical production Diesel Truck, running from about 23:1 to 30:1 A/F (very lean) at full load to avoid smoke.  A/F is assumed to lean out at higher RPMs. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
5. 
Auto Diesel (prod w low smoke) is a typical production car Diesel, running about 20:1 A/F (very lean) at full load to avoid smoke. 

6. 
Diesel (race rich w high smoke) is a rich Diesel run in tractor pulls, and other types of racing.  The engine exhausts thick, black smoke running this rich but increases its power. 

7. 
Diesel (rich hi-smoke race-pump) is a rich Diesel run in tractor pulls, and other types of racing.  The engine exhausts thick, black smoke running this rich but increases its power.  It also uses a special, "quick delivery" pump which shortens the injection time, speeding up combustion time.  This pump allows the Diesel to run a higher than normal RPMs. 



Estimate Piston-to-Valve Clearance 
This screen will estimate how close the valves get to the piston.  Although this is NO substitute to checking piston clearance with clay, it will let you try different cam profiles, rod lengths, strokes, head designs, etc to see how piston-to-valve clearance is likely to change. 
Assumptions: 
• 
The program assumes a FLAT TOP piston.  Clearances for domed pistons will be much tighter than shown here.   

• 
The program assumes NO rod stretch and NO valve tossing or valve train bending.  Therefore, clearances at high RPM are likely to be CLOSER than indicated here. 


 The clearances calculated are the closest the piston is to the valve, checked every 4 degrees of rotation.  If the clearance is less than .100, the clearance is printed in red. 
Negative (-) clearances mean the valve is extending into the piston that amount.  For example, if clearance is -.048 and you want .100 clearance, you must notch the piston .148 inches. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Definitions of input dimensions: Gasket Thickness:  Thickness of head gasket torqued to spec. 
Deck Ht Clearance: Distance from piston top at TDC to block deck.  If piston travels above the deck at TDC, enter an negative (-) number.  
Valve angles: Largest angle between valve stem and line perpendicular (90 deg) to the deck surface. For 23 degree Chevy heads, this would be 23. 
Deck/Valve Clearance: Closest distance between edge of valve and the head surface. If the valve(s) extend beyond the head surface (ex. valve touches table top when head sits on table), enter a negative (-) number for the amount of distance the valve edge extends beyond the head surface. See Figure 3. 
Click on Save Specs and these dimensions are saved with the engine file. 
Examples of dimensions for some typical heads are shown in Table 1. 
Table 1 Examples of Typical Head Specs 

Head Description  Int Valve Dia  Exh Valve Dia  Int Valve Angle  Int Deck/Valve Clearance  Exh Valve Angle  Exh Deck/Valve Clearance  
Stock SB Chevy 186, 492, etc  2.02  1.60  23  .01  23  .08  
Brodix -8 SB Chevy  2.08  1.625  23  .10  23  .14  
Merlin Cast Iron BB Chevy    2.19  1.88  27  .01  7  .55  
Stock SB Ford 351 W  1.84  1.54  20  .08  20  .10  
Stock Cleveland Ford 351 C  2.19  1.71  11  .13  11  .27  
Stock Pontiac 400, 455, etc  2.11  1.77  14  .13  14  .20  

IMPORTANT: These example specs may NOT exactly match your heads.  Use with caution! 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Graphing Features 
The 'Plus' features add 2 powerful features to the Graph Screen, shown in Figure 4: 
1. 
Click on 'Format', then 'Special Graph Types' for a menu to graph most any calculated output vs RPM, like BSFC, Spark Advance, etc. 

2. 
Click on 'Optimize' to display several options at the bottom of the graph screen to modify most any engine specs and see the effect immediately on the torque and HP graph. 


These options are not visible unless you have the 'Plus' version or a displaying the 'Plus' version demo.  Click on Help at the Main Screen, then 'Engine Analyzer 'Plus' Features' to turn on the demo.  See Figure 1. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Special Graphs 
This menu lets you graph up to 4 different types of data on the same graph, for example Torque, HP and Spark Advance vs RPM. First, select 'RPM Data, Use Specs Below' as the Graph Type.  Then select the # of Data Types to include in the graph, from 1 to 4.  The appropriate # of graph specs will now be enabled. Now you can select from the Data Types available, Torque, HP, BSFC, etc. Then select the 'Multiplier' for each data type.  For example, BSFC only ranges from say .4 to .5 but torque and HP may range from 
100 to 500. BSFC would only show as a straight line a 500 HP scale.  However, if you multiply BSFC x 1000, BSFC would now range from 400 to 500 and show up clearly.  Therefore, select large multipliers for small data values. 
Optimize 
The Optimize feature lets you modify most any engine specs and immediately see the effect on performance.  See Figure 7. 
First, select the 'Component' you want to modify.  Then, select the 'Spec' for that Component. 
Depending on the type of Spec you selected, you will have a list of settings, or a text box where you can type in a new setting.  Each time you make a change to the setting, a new Torque and HP curve will be drawn so you can see the effect of this change. 
The Optimize feature lets you modify just 1 spec or many specs for various components.  For example, say you 
Spark Advance curves added to graph
start by modifying Intake Cam Centerline from the original 110 deg to 104 degrees.  Then you select to modify Intake Port Volume on the Head from the original 186 to 220 ccs.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Click on 'Save This Combo' to save any changes you have made to the Engine File you are working with.  Note that you are not asked if you want to save to a New Name, meaning these changes overwrite the current specs for the current Engine File.  Therefore, you may want to save your Engine to a New Name BEFORE you use the Optimize feature. 
Figure 7 Graphing Optimize Screen Summary of Original (baseline) Pick Component, then Spec to Optimize and New (current) combination 
These buttons let you save, Type in a new setting, or click on one of thequit, review or restore buttons to adjust up or down a little or a lot.settings. 

Click on 'Stop Optimize' to return to the normal graph screen and abandon any changes you have made. Click on 'Restore Original Specs' to return all modified specs back to their original settings. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Use Millimeters 
Figure 10 shows where you can select to use Millimeters to enter engine dimensions like Bore, Cam Lift, etc.  Note that these dimensions are changed if a file was saved in inches and the Preference is now set to MM.  If you switch back and forth between inches and MM, the actual measurements may change slightly due to this conversion and rounding errors. 
Desired Piston-to-Valve Clearance 
Figure 10 shows where you can select a Desired Piston-to-Valve Clearance from the drop-down list.  Most engine builders use .100” clearance for the intake and exhaust, but you can select anything you want here.  Because you can now select a clearance, the calculation menu for Piston-to-Valve Clearance is now different than in the earlier v3.0. 
Hide Output 
Some users have requested that certain output be eliminated, that it can add to confusion to customers reading the output.  Figure 10 shows where you can now select which outputs are not displayed or printed. 
Choose Different Graph Colors 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 





Figure 10 also shows how you can select each color for each graph line.  For example, if Yellow does not show up well on your printer, you can change each occurrence of yellow to, say pink.  This screen also lets you change the background color. 
New Plus Features in Version 3.4 
The Plus version now has over 20 added features compared to the Standard Engine Analyzer.  Here’s what we’ve added in v3.4 to the 10 Plus features in v3.2. 
1. 
We’ve added the ability to import flow files from Port Flow Analyzer.  Fig 11 and Fig 12. 

2. 
We’ve added a new screen to let you do Variable Cam Timing (VVT).  Fig 13. 

3. 
Dwell over Nose (Cheater profile) can now be more exactly defined, to the nearest 2 degree increment.  Fig 14. 

4. 
Also, now this setting (Dwell over Nose) can be different on the intake vs the exhaust.  Fig 14. 

5. 
The program now allows for using a Ramp Rating for the cam profile for more exact cam profiles.  Fig 14 and 15. 

6. 
There is also a ‘Clc’ screen to calculate the ramp rating to match certain duration specs at either .200 lift or seat timing.  Fig 14 and 15. 

7. 
Program now has Fuel Option of E85.  Fig 16. 

8. 
We’ve added an option to include the Special Calculations section for writing ASCII files of test results.  Fig 17. 

9. 
Program now has an “Edit Printed Graph” command under Format.  It opens a screen where you have several options on how to print your graph, include various comments, etc.  You can now select to include the torque and HP data in a table when you print out RPM data graphs as long as there are torque and/or HP data on the graph.  Fig 18 and 19. 

10. 
You can now print a Company Logo graphics files on reports and graphs.  This info is loaded in the Preferences screen.  Fig 19 and 20. 

11. 
You can specify 2 lines of text which can appear at the top of printouts of reports and graphs in the Preferences screen, under Printing/Graphing.  Fig 19 and 20. 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 




Figure 14 New Features in Cam/Valve Train Screen 
“Cheater” profiles are gone, replaced by Int and Exh “Dwell Over Nose shown below. 
New “Spec” (specified) profile option displays Ramp Rating input below for you to “fine tune” the ramp. 
Ramp Rating is 
displayed if you choose New VVT specs
“Spec” (user specified) as shown in
profile type in upper Figure 13.
right corner. Click on the “Clc” button to calculate from 2 duration specifications (Figure A 15). 
You pick std (no dwell) or Typical Cheater (lots of dwell), or the Plus Version lets you fine tune this in 2 degree steps. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Figure 15 Calc Ramp Rating Screen 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 







(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
New Plus Features in Version 3.4 B 
Version 3.4B has added new features in the Optimize screen.  Check the text on pages 204 and 205, and Fig B.11 on page 214. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Index 
1st Stage HP Rating, 56 1st Stage Starting RPM, 56 
2nd Stage Added HP, 56 2nd Stage Starting RPM, 56 
A/F, 32, 55, 56, 57, 61, 62, 65, 162, 165, 166, 168, 176, 177, 218, 219 
A/F Mix Qal, 57, 62, 177 
A/F Mixture Quality, 32, 62, 162 
Accessories, 8, 20, 122, 176, 178 
Accuracy, 5, 7, 8, 9, 23, 32, 36, 58, 65, 71, 72, 73, 76, 82, 84, 85, 92, 151, 152, 153, 160, 161, 162, 177, 179, 203, 204 
Actual CFM, 61, 142, 148, 175, 176, 177 
Adobe Acrobat, 179, 188, 203 
Alcohol, 47, 56, 57, 61, 62, 162, 166, 169 
Analysis Report, 4, 93, 95, 96, 142, 148, 153, 155, 158, 160, 178, 203 
Approx Camxe "Cam" Specs, 71 
Area, 66, 70 
ASCII, 4, 97, 188, 199, 204, 228, 234 
Assumed Rocker Arm Ratio, 86, 134 
Assumptions, 9, 23, 28, 29, 39, 40, 41, 46, 48, 55, 56, 57, 62, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 119, 129, 131, 134, 159, 161, 162, 163, 176, 177, 204, 218, 219 
Auto-Link, 180, 186 
Avg HP, 13, 114, 134, 139, 156 
Avg Port Diameter, 23, 73, 76, 149, 150 
Avg Tq, 13, 114, 134 
Axis, 104, 105 
Back Color, 105, 227 
Barometric Pressure, 54, 55, 60, 69, 87 
Baseline, 13, 129, 154, 157, 159 
BDC, 20, 63, 74, 105, 138, 179, 203 
Beginner, 17, 19, 20, 21, 27, 31, 33, 35, 38, 43, 45, 48, 50, 91, 119, 122, 204 
Belt Ratio, 49, 51, 86, 145, 175 
Bench Test Pres, 85 
Boost, 22, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 60, 64, 141, 142, 143, 146, 175 
Bore, 19, 20, 69, 74, 75, 123, 168, 177, 227 
Brake HP, 13, 60, 97, 99, 162, 167, 175, 177 
Brk Tq, 13, 60, 97, 162, 175, 177 
Browse, 10, 188 
BSAC, 62, 179 
BSFC, 62, 167, 221, 222 
Calculation Button, 14, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 30, 32, 35, 40, 49, 51, 54, 55, 73, 78, 80, 134, 145, 149, 150 
Calculation Menus, 4, 14, 40, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78, 80, 82, 85, 86, 87, 129, 134, 149 
Cam, 4, 7, 14, 18, 22, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 58, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 80, 81, 86, 119, 124, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 141, 151, 153, 155, 156, 160, 162, 166, 167, 168, 175, 177, 180, 187, 193, 194, 197, 203, 204, 205, 218, 219, 222, 227, 228, 231 
Cam Advance, 39, 132, 187 
Cam File, 197 
Camxe "Cam"/Valve Train, 4, 18, 37, 38, 72, 86, 124, 127, 129, 131, 133, 134, 187, 193, 194, 231 
Carb/T-B CFM Rating, 85, 150, 162, 175 
Carburetor(s), 31 
CD, 10 
Centerline, 18, 40, 41, 131, 132, 133, 222 
Centrifugal Supercharger, 43, 48, 49, 50, 51, 86, 144, 145, 146 
CFM, 24, 28, 32, 35, 36, 45, 50, 61, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 142, 143, 149, 150, 151, 155, 162, 175, 176, 177, 178, 218 
CFMxe "CFM" at Peak Efficiency, 45, 50 
CFM Rating, 28, 32, 35, 36, 85, 155, 162, 175, 177, 178 
Chamber, 22, 23, 75, 163 
Chamber ccs, 23 
Chamber CCs in Head, 75 
Chamber Design, 22, 163 
Cheater Cam Profile, 187, 228 
Clc button, 14, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 30, 32, 35, 40, 49, 51, 54, 55, 73, 78, 80, 134, 145, 149, 150, 187, 228 
Clearance Volume, 22, 68, 69, 75 
Closing @, 40 
Collector Length, 34 
Combustion Chamber, 169, 203 
Comma Separated, 97 
Comments, 11, 13, 30, 111, 125, 128, 180, 187, 188, 228 
Company Logo, 188, 228 
Component Examples, 89, 91 
Component Files, 189, 228 
Compression Ratio, 19, 22, 23, 68, 69, 73, 75, 123, 139, 148, 169, 177 
compressor map, 44, 45, 50 
Compressor Map, 44, 45, 50 
Convert to Columns, 97 
Coolant Temp, 55, 124, 125, 169, 175, 177 
Copy, 8, 109, 110, 116, 129, 149, 153, 159, 179, 204 
Crank Pulley Diameter, 49, 51, 86 
crankcase, 20 
Crankcase, 20 
Cursor, 100, 102, 135, 138, 179, 188 
Cycle Data, 59 
Cyl Vol, 22, 68 
Deck Height, 75, 76 
Deck Height Clearance, 75, 76 
Design, 33, 34, 43, 44, 48, 49, 84, 150, 162, 169 
Desired Cubic Inches, 74 
Desktop Dyno, 187 
Dew Point, 14, 55, 87, 178 
Diameter, 17, 23, 26, 33, 34, 48, 58, 71, 73, 76, 82, 149, 150, 156, 175 
Direct Injection, 203 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Directory, 7, 8, 97, 110, 119 Displacement, 68 Display User’s Manual, 179 Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment, 111, 180 Dry Bulb Temp, 87 Dual Plane, 28, 150 Dual Plug, 22 Duration, 18, 39, 40, 41, 131, 132, 133, 137, 139, 204, 205, 
Duration @ .050, 131 
Dwell over Nose, 187, 228 
Dynamic Comp. Ratio, 68, 69 
Dynamometer, 9, 13, 54, 55, 60, 61, 62, 69, 122, 160, 162, 175, 176, 177, 178, 187 
Dyno Sim, 187 
E85, 187, 228 
Edit Printed Graph, 188, 228 
Elevation, 54, 55, 60, 87, 178 
Email, 10 
Engine Analyzer Pro, 203, 204 
Engine File, 108, 109, 113, 223 
Engine HP, 26, 85 
Engine Library, 4, 12, 14, 93, 107, 109, 114, 119, 120, 125, 128, 129, 141, 149 
Engine RPM, 60 
Esc Key, 179, 183 
Est Idle Vac, 69, 129, 139, 155 
Ex AvgVel, 64, 159, 175 
Example Components, 4, 5, 17, 24, 25, 45, 50, 82, 84, 89, 90, 91, 92, 117, 119, 120, 122, 123, 124, 144, 179, 220 
Exh Pres, 36, 60, 142, 143, 175, 177 
Exh System, 4, 33, 35, 76, 80, 82, 85, 124, 142, 145, 159, 162, 168, 175, 177, 178, 187 
Exhaust Back Pressures, 36 
Exhaust System, 4, 33, 35, 76, 80, 82, 85, 124, 142, 145, 159, 162, 168, 187 
Experienced, 17, 127, 129, 204 
ExTun Prs, 64, 159 
F5 Key, 179, 183 
File, Engine, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 15, 97, 108, 109, 114, 119, 124, 125, 149, 175, 179, 186, 203, 204, 220, 227 
Flat Head, 22 
Flow Bench, 5, 18, 24, 25, 26, 30, 34, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 149, 151, 152, 160, 177 
Flow Bench Flow, 84, 85 
Flow Effcy, 8, 22, 24, 25, 26, 29, 30, 34, 64, 66, 78, 80, 81, 82, 149, 150, 151, 152, 173, 175, 176, 177, 179, 225 
Flow Efficiency, 8, 22, 24, 25, 26, 29, 30, 34, 64, 66, 78, 80, 81, 82, 149, 179, 225 
Flow Obtained, 80 
Flow w/o Runner, 81, 82 
Flow with, 82 
For Peak HPxe "HP" at This RPM, 58, 69, 153, 155 
For This Intake Runnerxe "Runner" Len, 58, 153 
Friction HP, 62, 146, 167, 175, 176, 177 
Fuel Flow, 61, 142, 143, 148, 165, 175, 176 
Fuel Injected, 32 
Fuel Injection, 124 Fuel Octane (R+M)/2, 57 Fuel Type, 56, 218 
Gasket Bore Dia, 75 
Gasket Bore Diameter, 75 
Gasket Thickness, 73, 75, 220 
GMC, 48 
Graphxe "Graphs" Title, 113, 203, 204 
Graphxe "Graphs"?, 113, 204 
Graphics File, 187, 188, 228 
Graphs, 4, 7, 12, 13, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 113, 114, 127, 128, 133, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 151, 152, 179, 180, 183, 184, 188, 200, 201, 203, 204, 218, 221, 222, 223, 227, 228, 235, 236 
Grid Style, 105, 203 
Gross Exhaust Valve Lift, 41 
Gross Intake Valve Lift, 41 
Gross Valve Lift, 132, 187 
Harley Davidson, 187 
Head(s), 4, 15, 19, 21, 25, 27, 29, 33, 58, 66, 70, 71, 73, 75, 76, 78, 79, 81, 123, 149, 150, 156, 163, 168 
Headers, 34, 35, 36, 113, 124, 178 
Height, 70, 75, 77 
Help, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 18, 69, 73, 125, 127, 143, 160, 175, 179, 185, 187, 204, 205, 218, 221 
Hemi, 22, 25 
History Log, 4, 93, 99, 100, 112, 113, 114, 129, 130, 132, 134, 135, 136, 139, 141, 143, 145, 156, 203, 204 
Hole Dia, 83 
HP, 5, 13, 20, 25, 36, 39, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65, 69, 71, 72, 85, 92, 95, 100, 119, 124, 126, 127, 128, 136, 139, 143, 145, 146, 147, 153, 155, 156, 160, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 175, 176, 177, 178, 182, 188, 221, 222, 228 
HPxe "HP" Pk Int Dur, 72 
HPxe "HP" Pk, Exh Dur, 72 
Hydraulic, 5, 7, 39, 40, 64, 69, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 204 
Idle Vacuum, 66, 69, 129, 139, 155 
In InertiaPrs, 64, 151, 155, 156, 157, 176 
In ResTunPrs, 64, 70, 71, 155, 156, 157, 160 
Include Engine Comments, 111 
Include Engine Specs, 111 
Include Text, 97 
Incr., 114 
individual runner, 28, 29, 34, 76, 153, 177 
Inertia, 70, 71, 139, 156, 157, 158, 171, 172 
Install, 10 
Installation, 4, 10, 14, 34, 80, 82, 131, 146, 149, 178 
Installing, 5, 129, 144 
Int AvgVel, 63 
Int Vac, 60, 142, 155, 175, 176 
Intake Air Temp, 54, 55, 60, 178 
Intake Duration, 39, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 128, 131, 132, 136, 137, 139, 151, 175, 177, 187, 228 
Intake Heat, 31, 91, 175, 177, 178 
Intake Manifold, 23, 58, 64, 69, 73, 123, 124, 162 
Intake System, 4, 27, 31, 34, 35, 70, 76, 80, 82, 123, 124, 149, 150, 151, 156, 168, 177, 218 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Intercooler Eff, 46, 47, 51, 141, 145 Island CFM, 44, 45 
Jet, 55, 85 
Knock Index, 57 Know, 5, 73, 76, 87, 119 
Lash, 38, 40, 41, 64, 131, 134, 163, 175 
Layout, 23, 26, 27, 29, 33, 70, 71, 79 
Legend, 100, 103, 113, 135, 188 
Length, 17, 23, 70, 73 
Library, 12, 45, 49, 107, 108, 109, 129, 141, 153, 179 
Liftxe "Valve Lift" for Rating Events, 39, 40, 131 
Lifter, 5, 31, 39, 40, 41, 64, 65, 67, 72, 86, 97, 129, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 139, 163, 177, 205 
Lifter (profile) Type, 39, 40, 131, 133 
Lifterxe "Lifter" Pump Up, 39, 64, 65, 97, 132, 163, 205 
Line Style, 105 
Lobe Centerlns, 68 
Lobe Area, 67 
Lobe Separation, 41, 67, 131, 132, 134, 187 
log, 7, 114 
Log, 33, 99, 100, 112, 129, 143 
Log Manifold, 33 
Look For It, 116 
Mach #, 8, 62, 63, 71, 151, 155, 175, 177 Manifold Type, 28, 31, 32, 64, 89, 123, 124 Max Lobe Lift, 39, 40, 41, 86, 132, 134 Max Safe Pulley RPM, 51, 145, 146 Mech Eff, 167, 168 Motoring HP, 62 Mufflers, 36, 85, 124, 142, 145 
Nitrous, 5, 55, 61, 62, 124, 141, 146, 147, 148, 168, 169 Notepad, 8, 203, 204 Number of RPM Steps, 57 
Octane, 56, 57, 61, 62, 124, 125, 141, 143, 145, 148, 162, 177, 179 
Open File, 7, 8, 11, 18, 25, 32, 35, 36, 40, 107, 108, 119, 129, 142, 145, 149, 153, 178, 185, 204 
Opening @, 40 
Optimize, 180, 182, 187, 204, 205, 218, 221, 222, 223, 238 
Optimize Using These Cams, 187 
Outside Air Temp, 87 
Outside Rel Humidity, 87 
Overlap, 63, 65, 66, 67, 129, 137, 139, 155, 156, 160 
Overlap Area, 63, 65, 66, 67, 129, 137, 139 
PDF, 179, 203 
Peak Efficiency, 45, 50 
Peak HP, 114, 133, 134, 139, 146, 151 
Peak Tq, 114 
Pent Roof, 22 
Piston, 20, 22, 23, 63, 68, 69, 74, 75, 76, 155, 158, 164, 167, 168, 171, 172, 219, 220 
Piston Dome, 73, 75 
Piston Dome CCs, 73, 75 Piston Gs @ TDC, 63 
Piston Spd, 63, 155, 158 
Pistons/Bearings, 20 
Plus version, 21, 26, 37, 53, 89, 93, 97, 111, 117, 129, 149, 187, 188, 228 
Plus Version, 187, 188, 191, 192, 204 
Port Flow Analyzer, 187, 191, 228, 229 
Port Length, 17, 23, 58, 70, 71, 73, 76, 156 
Port Volume, 17, 23, 58, 71, 73, 76, 149, 222 
Port/Runner Volume, 77 
Preferences, 4, 11, 17, 40, 79, 90, 91, 119, 127, 129, 180, 183, 187, 188, 202, 203, 204, 226, 227, 228, 237 
Pres Ratio at Pk Effcy, 45, 50 
Primary Diameter, 34, 159 
Primary Length, 34, 159 
Primary Throttle Dia, 83 
Primary Tube O.D., 71 
Print, 4, 7, 8, 13, 73, 76, 93, 101, 111, 112, 179, 188, 204, 218, 228 
Print Blank Worksheet, 111 
Print Help Definitions, 112 
Print History, 112 
Printers, 179, 188 
Pulley RPMxe "RPM" at Pk Effy, 50 
Pump Up, 65, 132 
Pushrod, 131, 133 
Ramp Rating (cam), 187, 228, 232 
Readme.doc, 8 
Rec Area, 70, 71 
Rec Len, 70, 71 
Registered Code, 10 
Registered Name, 10 
Request Report Comment, 111 
Resonance, 171, 172 
Restrictor Plate, 83, 84 
Rocker Arm Ratio, 38, 39, 41, 86, 132, 134, 163, 177, 187 
Rod Length, 20 
Roots Supercharger, 43, 48, 49, 86, 175, 187 
RPM, 13, 20, 22, 28, 32, 36, 44, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 95, 96, 97, 99, 112, 114, 119, 124, 126, 127, 132, 133, 136, 137, 139, 141, 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148, 151, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 166, 168, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 182, 188, 203, 204, 219, 221, 222, 228 
RPM Data, 59, 60, 97, 99, 112, 132, 155, 171, 177, 188, 222, 228 
RPM Step Size, 57 
Runner, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 58, 63, 64, 65, 66, 69, 70, 71, 73, 76, 77, 80, 81, 82, 123, 139, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 177, 180 
Runner Diameter, 27, 29, 30, 73, 76, 81, 82, 149, 150, 156 
Runner Flow Coef, 173 
Runner Length, 23, 29, 70, 73, 150, 156 
runnerxe "Runner"/cyl, 27, 33 
Running Conditions, 4, 12, 13, 14, 46, 51, 53, 69, 70, 87, 124, 126, 141, 143, 146, 153, 168, 178, 198, 218, 219, 233 
S/C Pulley Diameter, 49, 51, 86 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 1998 Engine Analyzer Appendixes 
Safety, 3, 9, 13, 20, 46, 49, 51, 64, 65, 93, 95, 96, 131, 144, 146, 148, 153, 158, 168 
Save, 7, 11, 91, 97, 109, 114, 125, 128, 220, 223 
Save to Engine Library, 125, 128 
Savexe "Save"?, 114 
Saving Examples, 91 
Scales, 36, 45, 50, 100, 104, 105, 180, 188, 222 
Screen, Larger Fonts, 203 
Screen, Resize, 204 
Seat Timing, 7, 187, 228 
Secondary Throttle Dia, 32, 83, 176, 177 
Secondary Throttlexe "Secondary Throttle Dia"s, 32, 176, 177 
Seek, 116 
Send to Vehicle Program, 4, 115 
Setup, 10 
Shape, 77 
Short Block, 4, 19, 22, 28, 74, 75, 89, 120, 121, 122, 123, 162, 169, 176, 187, 204 
Single Plane, 28 
Spark, 22, 49, 55, 56, 65, 141, 142, 143, 148, 164, 167, 169, 176, 177, 179, 221, 222, 224 
Sparkxe "Spark" Adv, 65, 142, 143, 169, 177, 221, 222, 224 
Spark Knock, 49, 65, 141, 142, 148, 177 
Special Calculations, 58, 59, 65, 112, 129, 130, 151, 156, 160, 162, 188, 203, 228 
Special Graph, 188, 221, 222 
Stan Weiss, 187 
Starting Point Suggestions, 58, 69, 125, 129, 153, 155, 156, 160, 180 
Starting RPM, 57, 124, 153 
Streamlined Manifold, 33 
Stroke, 19, 20, 62, 63, 69, 74, 75, 166, 168, 177 
Supercharger, Screw Type, 203 
Supercharging, 4, 5, 14, 22, 43, 48, 49, 50, 51, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 67, 72, 86, 124, 141, 142, 144, 145, 146, 148, 153, 159, 160, 168, 169, 171, 175, 187, 198 
System Type, 55, 124 
TDC, 20, 63, 65, 68, 74, 76, 105, 179, 203, 220 
Tech Help, 2, 9, 10 
Test Conditions, 54 
Test Pressure, 18, 79, 80, 81, 82, 85, 149, 150 
Test Title, 113, 129, 132 
Theo. Crank Comprssn, 69, 129 
Thermal Eff, 167, 168 
Throttle Body(s), 31 
Torque, 5, 20, 28, 39, 58, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65, 69, 99, 100, 114, 124, 127, 133, 134, 136, 139, 142, 145, 146, 147, 148, 151, 155, 156, 160, 161, 162, 167, 171, 172, 173, 175, 177, 178, 179, 182, 188, 218, 221, 222, 228 
Total # Pri. Throttle Plates, 83 
Total # Sec. Throttle Plates, 83 
Total Avg Flow Coef, 66, 162 
Total Cam Advance, 38, 39, 131, 134, 175 Total CFM Rating, 28, 32, 35 
Total Exh/Int %, 66, 129, 139, 151, 155 
Total Length, 33 
Tuning, 5, 9, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 55, 58, 63, 64, 65, 69, 70, 71, 82, 127, 137, 149, 151, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 203 
Turbine Nozzle, 44, 46 
Turbocharging, 5, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 51, 60, 66, 141, 142, 143, 144, 148, 187 
Type, 19, 21, 22, 27, 31, 33, 35, 38, 43, 44, 45, 48, 49, 50, 85, 89, 120, 123, 124, 127, 131, 134, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 149, 188, 203, 222 
Type of Vehicle, 85 
Typical, 16, 20, 22, 27, 38, 44, 45, 50, 73, 89, 91, 96, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127, 128, 141, 171, 178, 187, 220 
Typical Examples, 16, 20, 22, 27, 38, 44, 45, 50, 73, 89, 91, 96, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127, 128, 141, 171, 178, 187, 220 
Typical Octane, 187 
Valve Dia, 23, 26, 79, 81, 149, 175, 177, 220 
Valve Diameter, 23, 26, 79, 81, 149, 175, 177 
Valve Lift, 24, 39, 40, 41, 59, 66, 67, 71, 72, 79, 80, 81, 82, 86, 99, 100, 105, 128, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 137, 139, 149, 150, 151, 177, 179, 187, 203, 205, 218, 227, 228 
Valve Lift Tested, 79, 81 
Valve Toss, 39, 64, 65, 97, 135, 139, 163, 177, 205 
Valve Train, 38, 39, 41, 65, 124, 131, 133, 135, 139, 168, 177 
vapor pressure, 57, 62, 162, 177 
Variable Cam Timing (VVT), 187, 228 
Vista, 8, 187 
Vlv Area, 66, 67, 68, 129, 139, 151 
Vol Eff, 60, 61, 156, 166, 168 
Volume, 17, 22, 23, 48, 58, 71, 73, 75, 175 
Volumexe "Volume"/Revolution, 48, 175 
Volumetric Efficiency, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 67, 155, 161, 162, 166, 171, 172 
Wastegate Limit, 46, 141, 142 
Weather, 46, 51, 53, 54, 124, 168, 178 
Wedge, 22 
Weiss, Stan, 187 
Wet Bulb Temp, 87 
Width, 70, 77, 180 
windage, 20 
Windows, 1, 7, 8, 101, 108, 110, 112, 115, 116, 119, 125, 179, 187 
Windows 7, 187 
Working Code, 10 
WOT, 32, 176 
Zoom, 7, 137 Zoomies, 33 
Engine Analyzer Pro 
User’s Manual 
Version 3.9 B 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48153 248-473-9230 Fax 248-442-7750 Website: www.performancetrends.com Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Performance Trends, Inc.  PO Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48152 Tech Assistance for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230 Fax: 248-442-7750  Email:  feedback@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice 
Copyright (C) 2016 PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC.    All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp.  1982-2009 All Rights Reserved 
International Business Machines Corp. makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, regarding the enclosed computer package, its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.   
IBM PC, XT, and AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp. MS-DOS is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. Cam Dr is a trademark of Quadrant Scientific. Paxton is a trademark of Paxton Products Inc. Vortech is a trademark of Vortech Engineering Inc. Competition Cams is a trademark of Competition Cams Inc. Depac is a trademark of Depac Dyno Systems B & M is a trademark of B & M Automotive Products Weiand is a trademark of Weiand Automotive Industries Crower is a trademark of Crower Cams Lunati is a trademark of Lunati Cams Isky is a trademark of Isky Cams 
DISCLAIMER Of WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION Of FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE Of SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY Of OBLIGATION Of PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES. PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
Continued on next page. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS Of PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE Of THE POSSIBILITY Of SUCH DAMAGES. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS Of ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
******************************************* W A R N I N G  ****************************************** 
The Engine Analyzer Pro makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with engines and vehicles.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-Obtaining data to input to the program
 -Interpreting the program's results Before making measurements of or modifications to any vehicle, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO:
 -Regard the safety consequences 
-Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 
-Read the entire user's manual 
-Obey all federal, state & local laws 
-Respect the rights and safety of others 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Overview of Features 1 
1.2 Before You Start 2 
1.3 A Word of Caution 3 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 4 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 5 
Chapter 2 Definitions 9 
2.0 Basic Program Operation 9 2.1 Preferences 11 
2.2 Short Block 13 
2.3 Cylinder Head(s) 17 
2.4 Intake System 25 
2.4.1 Fuel Delivery Specs 31 
2.5 Exhaust System 35 
2.6 Cam/Valve Train 41 
2.6.1 Alternate Cam/Valve Train Specs 45 
2.6.2 Valve Train Dynamics Specs 47 
2.7 Supercharger 
2.7.1 Roots Supercharger 51 2.7.2 Centrifugal Supercharger 55 2.7.3 Turbocharger 58 
2.8 Calculate Performance 63 
2.8.1 Calculation Conditions 63 
2.8.2 Test Results for Calculated Performance 94 
2.9 Calculation Menus 97 
Chapter 3 Output 125 
3.1 Tuning Pressures 126 3.2 Analysis Report 129 3.3 ASCII Data Files 130 3.4 Graphs 131 3.5 Printer Output 145 3.6 Data Library 147 3.7 See Engine 153 
Table of Contents, cont 
Chapter 4 Examples 
155 
Example 4.1 Installing a Larger Carburetor And Intake Manifold 157 Example 4.2 Installing Hydraulic and Solid Lifter Camshafts 167 Example 4.3 Supercharging, Turbocharging And Nitrous Oxide 179 Example 4.4 Using Flow Bench Data 187 Example 4.5 Optimizing Tuning 194 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 201 Appendix 2: Summary of 4 Cycle, Internal 
Combustion Engine Theory 208 Appendix 3: Intake and Exhaust Tuning 214 Appendix 4: "Fine Tuning" Torque & HP Curves 219 Appendix 5: Watching Tuning Pressure and Flow 223 Appendix 6: Why So Many Inputs 230 Appendix 7: Copying Files 232 Appendix 8: Cam Calculations 233 Appendix 9: New Features in Version 3.3 235 Appendix 10: New Features in Version 3.5 251 Appendix 11: New Features in Version 3.9 261 Appendix 12: New Features in Version 3.9 B 277 Appendix 13: Features in Enterprise Edition 287 Index 313 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features 
The Engine Analyzer Pro program by Performance Trends, Inc. is a software system to help professional engine builders, racers and engineers understand and predict many aspects of full power engine performance.  The Engine Analyzer Pro has numerous options to allow the user to simulate innovative and unusual engine designs.  The Pro's major features are listed below: 
Features: 
• 
Calculation of all parameters every 4 degrees of crank rotation, including dynamic valve lift, valve flow area, cylinder pressure, port pressures, net valve flow, heat losses, etc.  Some are calculated every .1 degrees. 

• 
Simulation of intake and exhaust pressure waves for more accurate, sophisticated tuning simulations. 

• 
Provision for full valve flow curve input, at up to 8 lift points. 

• 
Provision for entering cam lift files for detailed specification of cam profiles.  Possible formats include Cam Dr (tm), Competition Cams (tm), S96, Doctor Dr (tm), and more. 

• 
Two mass model of valve train dynamics, for accurate and detailed simulation of valve train forces, bending and tossing. 

• 
"Cycle plot" feature to allow plotting of instantaneous valve lift, valve flow area, cylinder pressure, port pressures, piston acceleration, piston thrust, and many other parameters.  This allows you to understand why a power curve looks as it does. 

• 
"RPM" plots to allow plotting of any "power curve" parameter vs RPM. 

• 
Inputs to simulate engine details like bearing sizes, anti-reversion, ring leakage, rod length, spark curves, fuel octane, etc. 

• 
Component libraries for storing Cm/Valve Train files, Short Block files, etc.  Swap in a new cam and heads with only a couple of mouse clicks!  There is also a complete Engine Library for saving combinations of components. 

• 
Built in calculation menus to determine user inputs like compression ratio, carb/throttle body flow rating, cam events @ .050" lift, etc. 

• 
Data output files (ASCII) for use in other data base, spreadsheet or graphics software packages. 

• 
Detailed supercharger and turbocharger simulations. 


New Features for Windows Version 2.1 
• 
More accurate intake and exhaust tuning simulations. 

• 
New, more detailed specs, especially for describing intake and exhaust runners. 

• 
Analysis report to help you understand the results and give tips to improve performance. 

• 
‘See Engine’ screen shows tuning pressures and flows, and piston-to-valve clearance. 

• 
Calculate results for up to 20 RPMs. 

• 
Displays tuning pressures and flows during calculations, if you wish. 

• 
Saves Test Files of calculated results for future analysis or graphical comparisons. 

• 
Greatly expanded graphing features 

• 
Enhanced printouts of reports and graphs. 


See Appendices 9, 10, 11, 12, pages 235-286 for features new to v3.3, 3.5, 3.9, 3.9B. See Appendices 13, pages 287-312 for features in Advanced Enterprise Edition. 
Please read Sections 1.2 "Before You Start" and 1.3 "A Word of Caution" before you turn on the computer.  Then try running the program following the guidelines in 1.4 "Getting Started" and 1.5 "Example to Get You Going".  When you feel a little familiar with the program, take time to read this entire manual.  It will show you all the things you can do with this powerful tool. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
IBM Pentium computer running Windows XP, Vista, Windows 7 through 10 (or 100% compatible). 

• 
Approximately 30 Megabyte of disk space.  (More is required for storing large numbers of tests.) 


Many terms used by the Engine Analyzer Pro and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, i.e. Inertia, Correction Factor, etc.  However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Engine Analyzer Pro. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Engine Analyzer Pro directory or folder. This file can be displayed right in the Engine Analyzer Pro by clicking on Help at the Main Screen, then clicking on Display Readme.doc File.  You can also read it using utilities like NotePad or WordPad. 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Engine Analyzer Pro is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures the legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  All features work in Demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Basic version, or the full Professional version for ten days.  Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”.  This Unlocking Code will be for either the Basic version or the Pro Version, whichever you have purchased.   
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your disk serial number (stamped in blue on the disk), your registered name and code number, and computer hardware number.  The registered name and code numbers are available by clicking on file in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as shown in Figure 1.1. 
Performance Trends will provide you an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking code number and click on OK.  If you 
typed in the number correctly, you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 1.1, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers.   

You may need to transfer the program to another computer, like when you buy a new computer.  If so, install the program on the new computer.  It will run for 10 days.  During that 10 days, call when you can have your old computer up and running.  Go into the Engine Analyzer Pro program, click on File, then Transfer Program to Another Computer.  Performance Trends will ask for some numbers from this screen and give you a code # which will permanently turn the program Off on this old computer.  Then give Performance Trends the information for the new computer and they will give you a new unlocking code free 
Also see Section 1.4 on page 4. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
The Engine Analyzer Pro is a comprehensive software package which estimates an engine's performance based on limited user input. These estimates can be used for analysis of dynamometer, race track or normal street performance.   
An engine is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible.  Therefore, several simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level.  See the Assumptions in Appendix 1.  The user must recognize: 
The software can not predict the safety of an engine modification or running situation.  Done correctly, with the proper quality parts and safety precautions, extreme engine conditions can be safe.  Done by inexperienced builders with standard or low quality parts, an engine can be a "disaster waiting to happen".  Please read and follow the "Safety Notes" as highlighted in this manual. 
The software, like any computer model, can NOT make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software is estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions within the program will limit the accuracy. 

• 
Environmental conditions, temperatures, etc. are rarely constant and repeatable. 

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help you understand how an engine works; what parameters are important, how parameters interact, what are the trade offs, etc. 

• 
Point you in the correct, general direction for making modifications. This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, engine tests, books, etc.  Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense to you. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all your data input. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Computer programs are written by normal people who can make mistakes.  It's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your phone call may help us correct it.) 




Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope. 
IMPORTANT: The Engine Analyzer Pro program will ask for engine specs and measurements to be entered. The Engine Analyzer Pro program is NOT checking for all safe limits of the engine design. You must have your engine design checked by a qualified engineer or engine builder to determine its safe operating range. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Engine Analyzer Pro from the CD to a hard drive before it will run.  To do this, generally you can simply put the CD in the CD drive and close the door.  The installation program should start automatically, bringing up the Performance Trends Installation Wizard.  This program can install most any of our products in Demo mode, including the Engine Analyzer Pro you just purchased.  Select (click on) the button for Engine Analyzer Pro and the installation will begin. 
Entering Registered Owner's Name: 
The first time you run the Engine Analyzer Pro, you will be asked to enter your name as the Registered Owner.  During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied. Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a Registered Code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card. 
Click on Help, then About Engine Analyzer Pro at the Main Screen to review your name and code # . 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Drag Race DataMite Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  Check Section 1.2 on page 2 for details on unlocking the program via a code # you can obtain from Performance Trends. 

Important: In the 10 day Demo mode, all features work as in the working version. Therefore you do not need to immediately unlock it before you use it. Then, even after 10 days, you can still call for an unlock code.  Its just that after 10 days, the program will not do anything other than let you unlock it. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Engine Analyzer Pro, click on the desktop icon for Engine Analyzer Pro.  After some brief introduction screens, you will be left at the Main Menu shown below. 
From this main menu, you can:                                            
• 
Choose to review or modify any of the categories of engine specifications displayed. 

• 
Retrieve or save a file of complete engine specifications by clicking on the Retrieve or Save buttons (first 2 buttons on the left) or the File menu item, then either Load or Save. 

• 
Add, edit or review engine comments to describe the engine currently held in the program.   

• 
Calculate engine performance from the options listed under Calculate Performance.  From here you can specify calculation options (barometric pressure, humidity, nitrous oxide, fuel type, etc.) and select to do Chain Calculations. 

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for you. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help or pressing <F1>. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
In the Main Menu’s blue title bar you will notice the current Engine is [SUPERSTOCK].  The program has descriptions of engines saved in the Library right from the factory.  The current file from the Engine Library is called SUPERSTOCK.  
To get started, let's examine (but not change) the various categories of specs.  Click on a button for one of the categories like Short Block, Intake System, etc.  A new menu will appear displaying the various specs and the current values for the SUPERSTOCK engine. In this menu’s blue title bar you will also notice a component file.  
The Engine File called SUPERSTOCK is made up of several major components. Each component has its own library of various Short Blocks, Intake Systems, etc.  This is explained in Section 3.6 "Data Libraries". You can click on the name of any spec and a brief description appears in the Help frame, along with a page #  from this manual for more help.  You can return to the Main Menu by clicking on OK or clicking on an area outside the Component menu. 
Now click on the Calculate Performance button in the Main Menu to calculate performance for this SUPERSTOCK engine.  The next menu will show you the Calculation Conditions menu as shown in Figure 1.2. 
For now, leave all the Calculation Conditions as they are and click on the Calculate Performance button.  This will start the program calculating performance for the specifications of the SUPERSTOCK stored in the Engine Library with the Calculation  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 
Conditions currently displayed.  Results are displayed as each RPM is calculated, and a progress bar graph shows how the calculations are progressing. The calculations may require several minutes on slower computers.   
The final results will appear as in Figure 1.3. There are 2 basic sections: 
• 
RPM data with results for each RPM you requested 

• 
Special calculations which are independent of RPM, like Engine Displacement, Dynamic Compression Ratio, etc. 


Since all the results can not fit on one screen, you must click on the 

slide bars on the right side of each section to view all the results.  If you have calculated results for more than approximately 12 RPMs, you  may also need to use the horizontal slide bar to see data for all RPMs you requested. 
The results contain much information, some which may not be familiar to you.  However, the first three rows in the RPM section do look familiar: 
-Engine RPM for engine speed in revolutions per minute 
-Brk Tq for Brake Torque in ft lbs 
-Brake HP for Brake Horsepower 
A torque peak of 403 ft lbs at 6250 RPM with a HP peak of 552 at 7750 RPM. Sure is easier than dyno testing!  (Results may be different in later versions of the program.) 
The menu bar and the command buttons at the top of the screen shows some of the options for various formats for data output: 
• 
Analyze will produce a report of performance and safety tips on the test results 

• 
Graph will produce various types of graphs.  You can also compare the current test results to results of other tests you have saved. 

• 
See Engine will show you a cross section view of your 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 

engine so you can watch 
intake and exhaust flows and 
tuning pressures, as well as 
see piston-to-valve clearance 
and valve train bending and 
tossing. 
• Print lets you print these test results. 
If you have a printer hooked up to your computer, try the Print command by clicking on Print in the menu bar or on the Printer button. A small menu of printout options are presented. These options allow you to enter a report comment, include engine specs and comments in the printout, etc.  These options are explained in Section 3.5.  For this first time, accept the default settings and print the report by clicking on Print Results. 
To help explain the other rows of output in the RPM or Special Calculations section, simply click on the results.  A definition of that particular test result will be presented in a Message box as in Figure 1.4.  Then click on OK when you have read the definition. 
For a detailed explanation of all the results, Calculation Conditions, and output options, go to Section 2.8 and Chapter 3. Clicking on Back or pressing the <ESC> key will return you to the Main Menu.  From the Main Menu you can modify the SUPERSTOCK to see the effect on performance.  For example you could go into any of the component menus and: 
• 
Specify a "wilder" cam (more duration or lift) 

• 
Install better heads (higher compression ratio, higher flow coefficients and/or larger valves) 

• 
Install a supercharger or turbocharger 


The beauty of the program is you can try things which are too expensive, too risky, or simply not possible with current technology. 
Many of the input specifications you see in the various menus may not be familiar to you.  For a brief definition of the inputs, simply click on the specification name.  The definition will appear in the Help frame with a page # in this manual for more info. 
Some of the engine specifications have “Clc” buttons.  One example is Compression Ratio in the Head(s) menu.  “Clc” stands for "calculate". For example, if you want to calculate compression ratio from chamber volume, deck height, etc., simply click on the Clc button. The program will display a new menu listing the inputs and the Calc Compression Ratio from these inputs.  For further explanation, click on the Help buttons in these menus. To use the Calc Compression Ratio calculated from these inputs, click on the Use Calc Value button.  Otherwise click on Cancel to return to the Head(s) menu with no change to Compression Ratio.  Section 2.9, Calculation Menus explains all these calculations. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 1 Introduction 
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various performance calculations, read Section 3.6 of this manual called Data Libraries to learn how to save a set of total engine or component specifications or recall information which has been previously saved.  Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Figure 2.1 shows the Engine Analyzer Pro’s Main Menu with explanations of your options here.  Figure 2.2 shows the Cam & Valve Train menu with explanations of options for most component menus. 
Figure 2.1 Basic Main Menu Features 
Menu bar where you can select: 1) File and then to save or retrieve an Engine file or to exit the program, 2) Calc HP to calculate results like torque and HP,  3) Help to bring up help screens to explain your options, 4) Preferences menu where you can custom tailor the program to your needs, 5) About screen to display your user name and code #, and the version # of the program 
Command buttons where you can select: 1) To retrieve an Engine file from the Engine Library, 2) Save the current specs to the Engine Library,  3) Run the program (calculate torque, HP, etc.), 4) Review results from previous Tests (calculated torque, HP, etc. results),   
5) Display the engine comments along with the comments for all the component specs 
Buttons to display component specs menus 
Program title which appears on printouts. This is a good place for a busines name. Click on Preferences to change it. 
Name of current complete engine file 


Current cubic inch displacement and total chamber volume in CCs based on Short Block and Head specs 

Comments for the current component files which make up this complete engine file 
Names of current component files which make up this complete engine file 
Enter comments to describe the engine here 
Click here to display Calculation Conditions (RPMs to run, weather conditions, etc.) Move mouse over an area of the menu and a description of the item is shown here 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.2, Explanation of Sections of Typical Menu 
Names of component specs. Click on them for a description in the Help frame. 
Option buttons. Click on one or the other to select a program option.  Many times this will enable or disable (dim) other program specs or buttons. 
Drop down combo box. If there’s a white space between the down arrow button and the text entry box, that means you can either type something in the box, or click on the arrow button to select a pre-programmed selection. 
Drop down combo box. If there is NO white space between the down arrow button and the text entry box, that means you can only click on the arrow button to select a pre-programmed selection. 
Standard text entry box where you can type in a component spec. 
Name of component file displayed in this menu. 

Calculation button which usually opens up another menu where you can calculate the spec from other inputs. 


“Non standard” Command button which opens up another menu or screen which is unique to this particular component menu. 

Comment text frame to enter a comment to describe these component specs. These comments are saved with the specs in the Component Library. 
Standard Command button to save the current set of specs to the Component Library under a name of your choice. 
Standard Command button to open up the Component Library for this particular component menu. Here you can retrieve a new set of specs for this component menu. These could be specs saved at the factory or specs you have saved. 
Standard Command button to bring up Help for this component menu 
Standard Command button to close this component menu 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.1 Preferences 
Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Menu screen to bring up the Preferences menu shown in 
Figure 2.3.  Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. 
As you can see there is some empty space in this menu.  It will likely grow  with new options as we get feedback from users. 
Program Title Comments 
Enter most any text here for the First and Second lines.  These 2 lines will appear at the top of printouts and printed graphs.  This is a good place for your business name or your personal name.  You can change these entries as often as you wish. 
Jet Recommendations 
Click on this combo box to select if you want the carburetor jet recommendations in the test results given either as: 
• 
Holley Jet # 

• 
Jet Diameter in thousandths of an inch. 



Lifter Pump Up Shows HP Loss 
Click on this combo box to select if you want the program to either: 
• 
When estimated hydraulic lifter pump up has occurred, to ask you if the program should assume lifter pump up has occurred.  You can then answer Yes or No.  If you answer No, you will then see how the program would estimate performance if lifter pump up did not occur at this RPM.  However at each higher RPM the program will again ask you the same question.  If this can become tedious, you may want to select the second option of Always described below. 

• 
When estimated hydraulic lifter pump up has occurred,  Always will go ahead and simulate the power loss to be expected when lifter pump up has occurred. 


Preferences have been greatly expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 – 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.2 Short Block 
The Short Block specs describe the engine's size, pistons, rings, bearings and front end accessories.  It also displays important engine volumes calculated from the current Short Block menu and Compression Ratio from the Cylinder Head(s) menu.  By changing Bore, Stroke and # Cylinders, you can immediately see the effect on cylinder displacement, total engine displacement, and clearance volume (assuming Compression Ratio stays fixed). 
Bore, inches 
The diameter of the cylinder measured in inches. 
Stroke, inches 
The distance the piston travels from TDC (top dead center) to BDC (bottom dead center) measured in inches. 
# Of Cylinders 
The number of cylinders for the engine. For example, for a V-8 this number is 8, for a single  cylinder engine this number would be 1. 

Piston Rings 
Click on this combo box to pick a general description of the # and tension of the piston rings. This specification only affects engine friction and not cylinder sealing. 
Rod Length, in 
The distance from the center of the wrist pin bore to the center of the crank journal bore measured in inches. This distance is typically not critical.  If you do not know it, multiply the stroke by 1.7. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Piston Skirt 
This combo box describes the size of the piston skirt that rubs on the cylinder bore.  This specification only affects engine friction. 
For users who want more detail, use Table 2.1 to pick an appropriate Piston Skirt description based on the piston’s effective piston skirt length.  Effective piston skirt length describes the average length of the skirt which rubs the bore, which is below the lowest piston ring, usually the oil control ring.   See Figure 2.6.  Table 2.1 shows the effective piston skirt length for the various ratings for different bores. 
Table 2.1 Effective Piston Skirt Length in Inches for Piston Skirt Ratings 

Bore, inches  Typical Skirt  Small Skirt  Very Small Skirt  Large Diesel Skirt  
3”  1.36  .95  .54  1.77  
4”  1.81  1.27  .73  2.36  
5”  2.27  1.59  .91  2.95  

Bearing Size 
This combo box lets you either: 
• 
Enter a number for Bearing Size Coefficient (a number you are probably not familiar with). 

• 
Click on the arrow button to pick a general Bearing Size Coefficient from a list. 

• 
Click on the Clc button and calculate the actual Bearing Size Coefficient from engine bearing sizes. 


Bearing Size Coefficient describes the relative size and number of the connecting rod, main and cam bearing journals for an engine with this bore size.  If you calculate the bearing size coefficient by clicking on the Clc button, see the details as explained in Section 2.9.1. The bearing size coef should be between .3 and 2.0 and only affects engine friction, not durability effects. 
Safety Note:  Specifying small bearings with the computer to reduce engine friction and produce better power is significantly easier than having small bearings "live" in an actual engine.  The Pro does NOT check to ensure bearing sizes are adequate for any particular running loads. 
Piston Top 
This combo box lets you pick if the top of the piston has been treated with any "heat insulating coatings".  Properties of insulating coatings can vary and may not match the properties assumed by the Pro.  For most cases, an insulating coating will improve thermal efficiency (BSFC and fuel economy) and hurt performance (volumetric efficiency will drop).  Also see Material/Coating under Head Specs in Section 2.3. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Cylinder Leakage 
This combo box describes the relative cylinder leakage by the piston rings.  The Pro only considers lost power due to lost gasses pushing on the piston.  It does not consider and friction or durability problems with blow-by destroying the oil film on the cylinder bore. 
Cooling Fan Type 
This combo box describes the type of cooling fan used to draw air through the radiator. This specification only affects engine friction.  The Engine Analyzer Pro assumes the fan size and friction level is related to engine size.  Therefore, if you change engine displacement, the program automatically changes the fan size to accommodate for the additional cooling requirements. 
Table 2.2 Description of Cooling Fan Types 
Type of Fan  Description  
None  No cooling fan on engine.  
Electric  Electric fan which uses battery power.  No direct connection to crankshaft so no direct loss.  
Clutch  Production, automotive with viscous clutch . (These fans are identified by LIGHTLY trying to spin the fan when the engine is not running, key out of the ignition.  If the fan spins with light force, it has a viscous clutch. SAFETY NOTE: BE CAREFUL NOT TO TURN OVER THE ENGINE, AS INADVERTENT ENGINE STARTING RESULTING IN HAND INJURIES IS POSSIBLE.)  
Flex  Production, automotive with "flex" blades. (These fans have blades made of thin, spring steel or plastic which are easily bent back by hand and by air as engine speed increases.)   
Solid Steel  Production, automotive fan with fixed blades. (These fans have blades made of thick steel, where the blades maintain the same "pitch" or "angle cutting the air" at all engine speeds. These fans are common on the cars of the 60s or older.)  

Water Pump & Drive 
Describes the type of water pump and belt/pulley system which drives it.  Use Table 2.3 to determine the correct type of water pump and drive.  This specification only affects engine friction. 
Table 2.3 Description of Water Pumps 
Type of Water Pump  Description  
None  No water pump (usually engine has no cooling system or is air cooled)  
Electric  Pump is driven by electric motor from battery power  
Lower Belt Ratio  Pump has larger pulley or crank has smaller pulley to underdrive the pump  
Small Pump  Pump has smaller diameter impeller or fewer vanes on pump, or other efficiency improvements.  
Production Size  Typical production pump  

Note: The Engine Analyzer Pro assumes the size and friction level of the water pump and drive is related to engine size.  Therefore, if you change engine displacement, the Engine Analyzer Pro automatically changes the size of the water pump and drive to accommodate for the additional cooling requirements. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Inertia, Lb x Ft^2 
This combo box lets you: 
• 
Type in an inertia value (which may be difficult for you to estimate) 

• 
Pick it from a list by clicking on the arrow button 

• 
Calculate it from other inputs by clicking on the Clc button. 


Inertia in Lb/Ft^2 is the rotating inertia of the engine, flywheel and dynamometer in units of pounds x feet squared.  Although inertia does not affect power at a steady RPM, it does absorb power while the engine is accelerating.  (This power is not lost, but can be recovered when the engine decelerates.  For example, when the car "jumps" ahead when being "power shifted" , the “jump” is from recovering the power absorbed in the engine’s inertia.)   
Some dynamometer tests are done under accelerating conditions.  The Engine Analyzer Pro can simulate steady state or accelerating dyno tests by setting Accel Rate, RPM/Sec in the Calculation Conditions menu.  If Accel Rate is set to 0 (steady state) this spec is ignored because no power is lost to inertia.  The higher the Accel Rate and the higher the Total Inertia, the more power lost to inertia.  See Section 2.9.2 for calculating Total Inertia. 
Crankshaft Design 
This combo box lets you pick a general design of the crankshaft as far as windage drag is concerned.  Windage can rob significant amounts or power from the engine, especially at high speed.  Pick from the following designs. 
• 
High Oil Drag is where there is higher than normal drag, like oil overfill or excessive foaming where the crank actually hits the oil level. 

• 
Typical windage would be a typical production design without provisions to minimize windage (like scrapers, windage tray, deep sump, etc.) 

• 
Low windage would be where provisions have been made to minimize windage (like scrapers, windage tray, deep sump, etc.) 

• 
Low Case Pressure is where a small air pump is used to reduce crankcase pressure significantly to over 10” mercury vacuum.  This is also the best choice for dry sump systems. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.3 Cylinder Head(s) 
The cylinder head specs affect intake and exhaust flow potential, compression ratio and the combustion chamber. 
Intake Port Specs: 
# Valves/Ports 
Identifies if there are 1, 2 or 3 intake valves per cylinder and how many ports there are for this number of intake valves.  If 2 or 3 valves are specified, both valves are assumed to be equal size and opened exactly the same.  If 2 or 3 ports are specified, the program also assumes the intake manifold has the same number of runners.  Therefore, if you have 2 or 3 valves per cylinder, and the ports from these valves siamese (run into each other) in the head or right after the head, specify the number of ports as 1. Click on the See Layout button at the bottom of this menu to see what the program assumes your head layout is based on your inputs. 
Valve Diameter, in 
Identifies the outside (largest) diameter of the head of the intake valve(s) in inches. 
Avg Port Diameter, in 
Identifies the average inside diameter of the intake port(s) over their entire length in the cylinder head.  Usually this can be measured at the end of the port which mates to the intake manifold.  A more precise way is to calculate the diameter by measuring the port volume and port length. 
If the ports are oval or rectangular, or you know the port volume in CCs and length, click on the Clc button described in section 2.9.3, to calculate the effective diameter.  If you  set the number of ports to 2 or 3, this is the diameter of only 1 of these ports.  These ports are assumed to be the same length and diameter. 
Avg Port Diameter is used by the Pro to determine critical flow  velocities, which significantly effect both intake and exhaust tuning and therefore performance. Try to be reasonable accurate inputting this value. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Port Length, in 
Is the length of the intake port (down the center of the port) from the intake valve to the end of the head port (the start of the intake manifold runner).  For many common heads, 4.5"-6" is a typical length.  This spec, combined with the Intake Manifold Runner Length, has a significant impact on intake tuning and therefore performance. Try to be reasonably accurate inputting this value. 
Cylinder Head Flow: 

 Single Flow Coef 

Flow
 Table 


The flow capacity of the heads can be described by a combination of the valve area (diameter) and an engineering term called flow coefficient.  The total flow capacity of the intake port and valve has a substantial impact on performance.  Precise information for a particular head design is only available from flow tests on a flow bench.  A flow bench is a device which will maintain a constant pressure drop across the port and measure the amount of air flow the pressure drop produces.  CFM (Cubic Feet per Minute) flow measurements are usually made with the valve at various lifts.  From this data and knowing the valve diameter, flow coefficients can be calculated.   
Flow coefficient is a way of defining how well a port flows for the size of flow area.  Flow coefficients can vary from .20 for a very restrictive port and valve up to 1.0 for a "free breathing" port design at low valve lifts. 
As lift increases, the valve opening area (curtain area) increases, flow increases and the flow coefficient changes somewhat.  See Figures 2.8 and 2.9.  This continues until valve lift is approximately equal to 1/4 the valve's diameter.  This lift is also called an L/D (ratio of valve lift to valve diameter) of .25 . At this point the valve area stops increasing with lift.  The minimum flow area is now the valve throat, not the "curtain area" around the circumference of the valve. See Fig 2.9. Additional valve lift gives no increase in valve area, although flow may still increase. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

The Engine Analyzer Pro lets you describe the flow characteristics of the port by either:
 -Entering one flow coefficient at the lift giving L/D=.25 if: 
 Use Single Flow Coef option button is marked.  This enables the Single Flow Coef spec and      disables the Flow Table button. 
-Entering flow values to calculate flow coefficients for a series of lifts, similar to data obtained in flow bench testing if: 
 Use Flow Table option button is marked.  This disables the Single Flow Coef spec and      enables the Flow Table button. 
Single Flow Coef 
If you do not have a full flow curve, the Engine Analyzer Pro can estimate the full curve from a flow coefficient at L/D=.25.  Table 2.4 gives some examples of flow coefficients for specific heads. 
Table 2.4: Examples of Flow Coef at L/D=.25  
   Description & Source  Int  Exh  
Stock "461" SB Chevy, Hot Rod 3/88 Stock "993" SB Chevy Open Chmbr, Vizard * Stock "186" SB Chevy Clsd Chmbr, Vizard * .423 Light Portd Bow Tie SB, Hot Rod 3/88    Bow Tie SB, CNC Portd 24502482, Cir Trk 9/93  Dart II SB Chev, C.I., Hot Rod 3/88 AFR SB Chev, Alum, Ported, Engines 93 Brodix SB Chev Track 1 Alum, Portd, Vizard * .495          FC  Dia  FC  Dia 
.439 .449 1.94 .476 .605 .538 .556 2.02  2.02 1.94 .466 2.05 2.15 2.02 2.02 .550  .410 .389 1.50 .527 .722 .546 .520 1.60  1.60 1.60 1.60 1.62 1.60 1.60  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Table 2.4: Examples of Flow Coef at L/D=.25, cont.                
   Description & Source  Int  Exh  
        FC  Dia  FC  Dia 
 Buick-Dart SB Chev Alum, Portd, Vizard * Lt Pt BB Chev, C.I. Oval Port, Perf Trnds     Portd BB Chev, C.I. Rect Port, SS&DI 6/81         Lt Pt BB Chev Merlin C.I. Oval Port, PrfTrns      Portd Dart Alum 360 BB Chev, Sonny's Racing    .522 .495 .50 .479 .574  2.22 2.19 2.30 2.19 2.30  .667 .400 .46 .445 .561  1.63 1.88 1.90 1.88 1.90  
    Ported 2.0L Ford OHC 4 cyl, Perf Trends        .490  1.75  .450  1.50  
Stock AR SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 Portd AR SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 Stock TFS SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 Portd TFS SB Ford Alum, Super Ford 8/89 Stock 1970 351W SB Ford, C.I., SprFrd 8/89 Portd 1970 351W SB Ford, C.I., SprFrd 8/89 Stock 1987 302 SB Ford, C.I., Car Crft 5/87  .464 .541  1.94 1.94 .498 .561 .442 .541 .412  .439 .614 1.94 1.94 1.84 1.84 1.78  1.60 1.60 .400 .637 .397 .565 .443  1.60 1.60 1.54 1.54 1.45  
Portd 70 Boss 302 Trans Am, Perf Trends     Portd "Pro Stock" Cleveland, SS&DI 6/81        .510  2.19 .520  .440 2.25  1.71 .460  1.71  
Briggs & Stratton, 5 HP, Perf Trends  .245  1.12  .294  .99  
    Pont RamAir III Stock, HP Pont 4/91 (adj) **      Pont RamAir IV Stock #641, HP Pont 4/91 (adj) ** Pont 15° 10033867 Portd, Chevy HP 6/93  .525  .409 .510 2.13  2.11 2.11 .640  .395 .466 1.61  1.77 1.77  
    Stock Mopar 360A, P4529589, Hot Rod 11/91     Portd Mopar 360A, P4529589, Hot Rod 11/91 Stock Mopar 440B, 452, Perf Trends Light Portd Mopar 440B, 452, Perf Trends Stock Mopar 440B, 240618, Perf Trends  .418 .490 .429 .465 .537  2.02 2.02 2.08 2.14 2.08  .482 .516 .413 .517 .471  1.60 1.60 1.74 1.74 1.88  
426 Hemi Stock, SAE 660342 426 Hemi Ported, SS&DI 6/81  .539 .60  2.25 2.25  -.56  -1.94  
1600 cc VW Stock Dual Port, Novak & Ass.     1600 cc VW Stock Dual Port 041, Novak & Ass.  1600 cc VW (aftermarket) AC910, Novak & Ass.  .482 .428 .455  1.40 1.54 1.97  .385 .464 .507  1.26 1.26 1.50  

* How to Build & Modify Chevrolet Small Block V-8 cylinder Heads, David Vizard, Motorbooks International, 1991. ** Adjusted down to match other sources of stock Pontiac flow data 
Additional heads are loaded in the cylinder Head(s) Library with full flow curves.  If you have flow bench data at approximately L/D=.25 , click on the Clc button to calculate Single Flow Coef as described in Section 2.9.4. 
Note: 
The total flow potential of a port depends not only on the flow coefficient, but also on the number of valves per cylinder and the valve diameter.  A very good Single Flow Coefficient (at L/D=.25) of say .6 to .75  does not mean the port/valve is not restrictive and limiting power.  What it means is to flow more air, you probably must increase the valve size.  See Figure 2.10. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

Flow Table 
If you have checked the Use Flow Table option button: 

 Use Single Flow Coef 


 Use Flow Table 


The Flow Table button becomes enabled.  Click on it to bring up the Intake Flow Table screen as shown in Figure 2.11. 
Enter the valve lift (or valve L/D) and the flow obtained during the flow test for up to 8 different valve lifts.  You will notice that as you enter lift in inches, L/D is automatically calculated and filled in, and vise versa.  As L/D is entered, lift in inches is calculated. The L/D is based on the current intake Valve Diameter in the Head(s) Specs menu. 
You must also specify the test pressure used during the flow test, or to which the flow data is corrected.  Specify test pressure with the text box at the top of the screen.  Common test pressures include 10, 25 and 28 inches of water. 
When both a lift and CFM flow rate are available, a flow coefficient for that lift is calculated and reported in the Flow Coef column and graphed.  The CFM flow is also graphed at the appropriate lift.  The flow coefficient is useful to check if your flow data is "reasonably accurate". For example, the flow coefficient will likely be lowest at L/D=.25.  See Figure 2.8. The flow coefficient will generally be its highest at low valve lifts because the flow restriction is due mostly to the valve and not the port itself. Flow coefficients greater than 1.0 are highly unlikely except at very low lifts.  Flow coefficients less than .3 are highly unlikely for OHV ports, less than .2 are unlikely for flat head ports.  See Example 4.4, "For Advanced Users". 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
If you are obtaining unreasonable flow coefficients, check to ensure you have specified the correct test pressure,  # Valves/Ports and Valve Diameter. 
Notes: 
If you are going to use the flow table, it is best to have at least 4 flow points, 2 points at less than L/D=.25, 1 point at approximately L/D=.25 and 1 point at maximum valve lift.  If you have less than these points, it may be best to select the Use Single Coef option button. 
For accurate flow tests, use radiused inlets (not the bare head) for flowing intake ports. Exhaust flow tests should be conducted with short (6-12 inches), straight exhaust pipes bolted to the port (not the bare head).  See Runner Flow Coef under Intake System, Section 2.9.7 and Example 4.4. 
Flow Table features have been expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Anti-Reversion, % 
Describes how well the port, valve and manifold resist flow in the reverse direction.  For the intake this would be flow leaving the cylinder and "back flowing" into the intake.  Ports which flow equally well in both directions would have 0% anti-reversion.  A port with reed valves (check valves) which only allow flow into the cylinder would have 100% anti-reversion.  See Section 
2.9.5and Example 4.4 for calculating anti-reversion from flow test data.  Note:  Most heads have very little or 0 anti-reversion. 
Combustion Chamber: 
Compression Ratio 
The engine's compression ratio based on cylinder clearance volume and total cylinder swept volume (sometimes called static compression ratio).  Do not use compression ratios which are corrected for cam timing, weather or supercharger boost. 
Compression Ratio = Clearance Volume + Swept Volume Clearance Volume 
Clearance Volume and Swept Volume must be in the same units, both either CCs or cubic inches.  Multiply CCs by .061 to obtain cubic inches, multiply cubic inches by 16.39 to obtain CCs. 
Since Compression Ratio has a Clc button, see Section 2.9.6 for calculating Compression Ratio from clearance volume, piston dome volume, deck height and gasket thickness. 
Chamber Design 
This combo box lets you pick a general chamber design.  This spec affects: 
• 
How well the chamber burns the air/fuel mixture for various compression ratios. 

• 
Spark plug location and number of spark plugs which affects burn rate. 

• 
V3.9 B now added Direct Injection to this list of descriptions. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Table 2.5 Descriptions of Chamber Designs 
Type  Description  
Typical Wedge  Wedge chamber with spark plug significantly offset from the center, high compression requires significant piston popup, squish/quench area does NOT have extremely tight clearance and is a low percent of the total chamber  
Compact Wedge  Wedge chamber with spark plug more centrally located, high compression does not requires significant piston popup, squish/quench area does have extremely tight clearance (.040-.060” depending on RPM range) and is a high percent of the total chamber, valve angles generally have to be reduced for this type of chamber.  
Hemi  Hemispherical chamber with centrally located spark plug, large domed pistons, squish/quench area does NOT have extremely tight clearance (.040-.060”, depending on RPM range) and is not a high percent of the total chamber.  
Flat Head  Large chamber with valves and spark plug off to the side of the bore.  
Pent Roof  Similar to hemi, but for most typical 4 valve engines.  
Dual Plug option for all designs listed above  Select the dual plug version of one of the chamber designs above if it has 2 spark plugs which fire at approximately the same time but at different locations in the chamber  

This spec does NOT affect flow as that is described by the flow coefficient data described earlier. 
Miscellaneous: 
Material/Coating 
This combo box lets you pick the head material (cast iron or aluminum) and whether any heat insulating coating is applied to the inside of the combustion chamber in the head.  See Piston Top under Short Block specs, Section 2.2. 
Swirl Rating (name switched to Burn Rating in v3.3) 
This combo box lets you pick a general description of the motion of the air/fuel charge in the combustion chamber after the intake valve closes.  Some intake ports and/or valves are designed to spin or swirl the charge, thus setting up a little "hurricane" in the combustion chamber.  This swirl causes the charge to burn faster, resulting in higher pressures and higher power output. However, an intake port which is designed to swirl the charge can be restrictive.  Great care must be taken to develop ports which produce good swirl and are free flowing.  Use Table 2.6 for picking a Swirl Rating. 
Tumble is another type of mixture motion, usually more evident in 4 valve engines.  Engines with good tumble should specify a higher swirl rating.  Swirl rating can also be used to speed up or slow down the burn rate the program is assuming for your engine.  If the program is calculating that your engine requires more spark advance than it actually needs (the Spark Curve option Program sets spark for best power must be selected), increase the swirl rating here to reduce the required spark advance. 
Table 2.6 Swirl Ratings 
Swirl Type  Description  
No Swirl  Standard head where swirl has been given no consideration in the  design  
Some Swirl  Production heads identified as “High Swirl” or “Fast Burn” which require less spark advance than most heads.  
Good Swirl  Heads with considerable flow bench and dyno development time to produce good swirl (not necessarily the highest swirl). These are heads which require much less spark advance than typical heads.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Exhaust Ports: 
# Valves/Ports Valve Diameter, in Avg Port Diameter, in Port Length, in Single Flow Coef Flow Table Anti-Reversion 
For these specs, see the definitions under Intake Ports in this section. 
Note:  Generally, exhaust ports have higher flow coefficients than intake ports by approximately .05.  Exhaust flow tests should be conducted with short, straight exhaust pipes (not the bare head).  See Section 2.9.4 and Example 4.4.  Ameduri Racing Products of Norco, CA, 909-371-8672 sells “Flow Tubes” for this purpose.  They are designed to work on flow benches where space is tight. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.4 Intake System 
The intake system specs affect intake tuning, restrictions, manifold heating, fuel metering and fuel mixture quality. 

Note: Intake System Specs have been greatly expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Manifold Specs (x rnnr/cyl) 
The "x rnnr/cyl" depends on the current value of # Valves/Ports under Intake Port specs in the Head(s) menu.  If x=2 or x=3, then the Manifold Specs of Runner Dia @ Head, Runner Length, Runner Flow Coef and Runner Taper describe only 1 of the 2 or 3 intake manifold runners for each cylinder. 
Runner Dia @ Head, in 
Identifies the effective inside diameter of the intake manifold runner(s) where the manifold attaches to the head.  If the runners 

are oval or rectangular or you know the runner volume and length, click on the Clc button as described in section 2.9.3, to calculate the effective diameter.   
The program assumes the same number of intake manifold runners per cylinder as you specify # Valves/Ports in the cylinder Head(s) menu.  The Runner Dia @ Head is the diameter of only 1 of the runners.  All runners are assumed to be the same length and diameter. 
Runner Length, in 
Is the length of the intake runner from the cylinder head port to the first "abrupt enlargement" of the runner upstream of the cylinder head.  The "abrupt enlargement" can be several different things: 
• 
The intake manifold plenum.  The plenum is the open area where all the runners merge, directly under the carburetor(s) or after the throttle body on fuel injected manifolds.  The best example of a plenum is the very evident "box" on "tunnel ram" type manifolds.  See Figure 2.16. 

• 
The end which is open to atmosphere (or air cleaner) on individual runner fuel injection or carburetion.  For "individual runner" carb systems, the runner length actually extends through the carb and through any velocity stack or air horn. 

• 
Any point where a runner from one cylinder merges with a runner from another cylinder. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Most production, carbureted manifolds have runners from 3 to 12 inches in length.  Manifolds for modern, production fuel injected engines generally have longer runners (8-20 inches) to take advantage of intake tuning effects at mid-range RPMs. Most manifolds have runners which vary in length from cylinder to cylinder.  Use the average length of all the runners, or the average of the longest and shortest runner for this spec. 
Runner Flow Coef 
Is similar to the Single Flow Coef number for the valve in the Head(s) menu, but describes the design of the runner within the intake manifold.  This does not describe the size or length of the runners, as they have been described by other specifications.  This specification says "for its particular size, how well is the intake runner designed".  Obviously, sharp bends to clear a distributor or provide for hood clearance, rough irregular surfaces, or abrupt changes in runner size where the intake manifold mates to the head, are undesirable from a restriction and tuning point of view.  See Figure 2.13. 
A general rule for a good manifold (and port) design is one where you can see the entire intake valve for all cylinders from the carburetor or throttle body. This type of design would likely have a Runner Flow Coef of 3, indicating virtually no restriction due to the manifold design.  Use Table 2.7 to estimate the Runner Flow Coef. 
Table 2.7 Estimates of Runner Flow Coef 

Manifold Description  Estimated Runner Flow Coef  
Production, carbureted manifolds  .7 to 1.5  
Production manifolds for individual cylinder fuel injection  1.0 to 2.0  
Aftermarket, dual plane intake manifolds  1.0 to 2.5  
Aftermarket, single plane, “X” type or “tunnel ram” manifolds  2.0 to 3.0  
Race single plane (sheet metal, custom design)  3.0  


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
    Figure 2.14 Illustration of Restriction Level vs Runner Flow Coef  
High 
Level of      Restriction      Or Power Loss 

Low 
0 1 2 3 Runner Flow Coef 
Runner Flow Coef is different from Head(s) Single Flow Coef in 2 ways.  First, it is normal to have a Runner Flow Coef greater than 1.0 .  Second, Runner Flow Coef has a very "non-linear" relationship to restriction.  This means that the difference in restriction between flow coefficients of .5 to 1.0 is much greater than the difference between 2.5 and 
3.0. Figure 2.14 shows that most change in restriction level occurs between Runner Flow Coefs of .5 and 1.5. 
Runner Flow Coef not only affects flow restriction, but has an influence on intake tuning.  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.5. 
See Section 2.9.7 for how to calculate Runner Flow Coef from flow bench data.  Even if you do not have flow bench data, review Section 2.9.7 for an understanding of how the flow capacity of the head’s ports relate to the intake manifold’s Runner Flow Coef. 
Manifold Type 
This combo box lets you pick the type of intake manifold design and the type of fuel delivery system.  This will determine what percent of the carburetor or throttle body is available to each individual cylinder and the type and strength of the intake tuning effects. 
Table 2.8 Descriptions of Manifold Types 

Manifold Type  Description  
Dual Plane - carb(s)  This manifold type is where half of the engine's cylinders "see" only half of the carburetor and are isolated from the other half of the cylinders.  This type of manifold gives a stronger fuel metering signal at low speed, because each induction pulse goes to a carburetor only half as big as the entire carburetor.  Most production carburetor systems are of this type for engines larger than 4 cylinders.  Dual plane intakes on engines with 6-10 cylinders also exhibit some "secondary" or low speed tuning effects. See Appendix 3 and Example 4.1.  A carburetor is the fuel metering device.  
Single Plane - carb(s)  A single plane manifold is where all cylinders can draw from all carburetor barrels.  For this reason, this manifold offers lower flow restriction at higher air flows (high RPM). These types of intakes on V- 8s tend to have shorter runners than either dual plane or tunnel ram manifolds. A "Street" single plane is one where tuning has been compromised to also provide hood clearance, good part throttle fuel distribution, good throttle response and cold weather operation, etc. Also see Tunnel Ram - carb(s) below. Single plane intakes on engines with 2-4 cylinders also exhibit "secondary" or low speed tuning effects. See Appendix 3 and Example 4.1. A carburetor is the fuel metering device.  
Tunnel Ram - carb(s)  This type of single plane manifold has been designed for optimum intake tuning and low flow restriction. See Figure 2.16. Single plane intakes on engines with 2-4 cylinders also exhibit "secondary" or low speed tuning effects.  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.1. A carburetor is the fuel metering device.  
Single Plenum - EFI  This type of production intake system is characterized by one injector dedicated to each cylinder and one large plenum which supplies air to all cylinders. Generally these intakes have been optimized for tuning effects, since fuel distribution and carb  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
"pump shot" lag are no longer a concern. These systems generally have runner lengths in the 8 to 20 inch range. Injected intakes on engines with from 2-4 cylinders also exhibit "secondary" or low speed tuning effects.  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.1. Fuel injection is the fuel metering device and a throttle body meters air.  
Split Plenum - EFI  This type of manifold is very similar to the Single Plenum-EFI above except it has a split plenum, each side supplying air to only half of the cylinders.  This type of fuel injected intake is usually used on engines with 6 or more cylinders to produce “secondary” tuning effects for improved low speed torque.  
Ind Runner - carb(s)  This manifold type has all cylinders completely isolated from one another.  This type of system generally offers the best potential for intake tuning.  However, these systems can be restrictive, even with a large Total CFM Ratings.  For example, each cylinder can draw from a 600 CFM carb on a single plane, V-8 manifold. However, each cylinder could only draw from a 75 CFM carburetor (one eighth of 600 CFM) with an individual runner system with a Total CFM Rating of 600. Individual runner manifolds will exhibit no "secondary" or low speed tuning effects.  If you specify # Of Cylinders as 1 in the Short Block specs, the program assumes an individual runner system, no matter what type is selected here. This system uses carburetors as the fuel metering device.  
Ind Runner - fuel inj  This type is like Ind Runner - carb(s) except fuel injection is the fuel metering device and individual port throttles meter air.  

Runner Taper, deg 
Is the taper on the runner.  If the runner is of constant cross sectional area, it would have zero taper.  If the angle for all sides is 1 deg from being straight, this would be a 2 degree taper.  If 2 sides are straight and 2 sides are tapered 1 degree from straight, this 
would be something less than 2 degrees of taper.  This can be confusing, so the best way to estimate runner taper is to click on the Clc button and calculate taper based on simpler inputs as shown in Section 2.9.8. 
Intake Heat 
This combo box lets you pick the method of heating the intake manifold for improved fuel atomization, fuel distribution and cold 

weather operation.  Use the Table 2.9 to estimate Intake Heat. 
Table 2.9 Descriptions of Intake Heat Ratings 
Description  Type of Intake Heat  
Production carbureted manifolds heated by exhaust gas and/or engine coolant.  Prod (full heat)  
Production individual cylinder fuel injection manifolds or carbureted manifolds with blocked exhaust crossover.  Reduced Heat  
Manifolds with no source of engine heat; fuel injection or carbs with individual stacks; manifolds which have no coolant passages, exhaust crossover, and are insulated or isolated from the lifter valley.  No Heat  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Fuel Delivery Calculations 

 Yes 


 No 


If you choose Yes for Fuel Delivery Calculations, as shown above, the See Specs button becomes enabled.  Click on this button to view a new menu of fuel delivery system (carb or electronic fuel injection) details.  See Fuel Delivery Specs in the next section. These specs have NO effect on performance but just the fuel delivery recommendations given in the test results. 
Carburetor(s) Throttle Body(s) 
The title of this section of the Intake System Specs menu is determined by the choice of Manifold Type. 
Total CFM Rating 
Is the air flow rating of the carburetor(s), or throttle body(s) if the engine is fuel injected.  The flow rating is measured in CFM (Cubic Feet per Minute) maintaining a 1.5" Hg (inches of mercury) pressure drop across the carburetor or throttle body.  Standard CFM at 1.5" Hg pressure drop (20.4" water is the standard method of rating 4 BBL carburetors.  Standard CFM ratings for 2 BBL and 1 BBL carburetors are measured with a 3" Hg pressure drop and must be converted to the 4 BBL rating before they will be accurate in the Engine Analyzer Pro program.  Use the .71 conversion as shown below: 
2 BBL CFM Rating x .71 = 4 BBL CFM Rating 
This spec  has a Clc button, which means you can calculate it from either: 
-Throttle bore sizes, # throttle bores, restrictor plate specs. 
-Flow bench data. 
See Section 2.9.9 on these options. 
Secondary Throttles 
This combo box identifies if the carburetor (or on rare occasions, the throttle body) has additional air flow capability at high air flow demands: 
• 
If there are no secondary throttles, pick the first choice “No Sec Throttles”.   

• 
If there are secondary throttle plates, check to see if they are mechanical secondaries. With the engine not running, see if all throttle plates are completely open with the throttle linkage in the WOT (Wide Open Throttle) position. If so, pick the “Mech Sec Throttles”.   

• 
If there are throttle openings which are not completely open, but which open "on demand" when engine air flow requirements increase, pick one of the other choices by estimating the RPM where they will open. 


Note:  If you have chosen Yes for Fuel Delivery Calculations and are using a carbureted Manifold Type, be sure you have specified the Fuel Delivery spec "# Secondry Venturis" as a number greater than 0. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Air Clnr Flow Rating 
Is the flow rating of the air cleaner filter element and housing measured in CFM with a pressure drop across the air cleaner of 3" water. Since this spec has a Clc button, you can calculate an air cleaner flow rating from air cleaner dimensions.  See Section 
2.9.10. If no air cleaner is used, enter a very high flow rating, for example 100000 CFM. 
Plenum Specs 

 Guess at Specs 


 Use Specs Below 


The intake manifold’s plenum is the volume directly after (under) the carb or throttle body before the air passage splits into the individual runners to each cylinder.  The large “box” under the carbs on a Tunnel Ram manifold is a good example of a large plenum.  Because plenum and secondary runners (the carb or throttle body dimension) specs are new to many users of the Pro, and for many engine combinations these specs usually have very little effect on performance, you may want to simply choose the Guess at Specs option.  This tells the 
  Figure 2.16 Secondary Runners (carb or throttle body throttle bores) 
  Effective area
    Plenum
  Runners to  Cylinders 

                                  Length 
program to use reasonable estimates of these plenum and secondary runner specs.  If you want to specify plenum specs, you must choose the Use Specs Below option button first.  Then these specs become enabled so you can change them. 
Note:  Depending on the Manifold Type in the Intake System Specs menu and # of Cylinders in the Short Block Specs menu, some or all of the plenum specs may be disabled.  For example, if you have chosen Ind Runner - carbs, there is no plenum.  Plenum Specs are disabled, you can not change them, and they are not used in the calculations. 
Plenum Volume 
Is the volume of the plenum in cubic inches.  It does not include the dimensions of the runners to the cylinders or any portion of the carb or throttle body or spacer which is approximately the same size as the throttle bores.  If the spacer is much larger than the throttle bores, like one single, large rectangular hole under a 4 barrel carb, then include the volume of the spacer in the plenum volume.  Click on the Clc button to calculate this volume from simple dimensions.  See Section 2.9.11. 
Effective Carb Length, in Effctv. Thrttl Bdy Len, in 
Is the length of the carb or throttle body throttle bores and any ducting before and after the throttle bores which are approximately the same diameter as the throttle bores. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Carb Area, sq in Throttle Body Area, sq in 
Is the total area of the carb or throttle body throttle bores and any ducting before and after the throttle bores which are approximately the same diameter as the throttle bores.  Click on the Clc button to calculate from simpler specs. 
2.4.1 Fuel Delivery Specs 
The specs in this menu only affect the recommended fuel settings in calculated performance, not any of the power calculations. Recommended fuel settings in the test results include: 
• 
Primary Jet and Secondary Jet if carbureted 

• 
Injctr Dty Cyc and Inj Plse Wdth if fuel injected 


The Pro assumes a 12.5 A/F for gas or a 5.0 A/F for alcohol is delivered regardless of how these specs are set. If you are using the Engine Analyzer Pro only for predicting performance, you should select No for the Fuel Delivery Calculations in the Intake System Specs menu shown in Figure 2.12.  Then you can disregard setting any of these specs. In that case, the test results of Primary Jet, Secondary Jet, Injctr Dty Cyc and Inj Plse Wdth are left blank. Figure 2.17 shows the Fuel Delivery menu which is displayed if you click on 

Fuel Injection Specs Injector Rating, lb/hr 
Is the "full open" fuel flow rating of one injector in pounds per hour for the particular fuel being used. Therefore, for alcohol engines, the injector rating, lb/hr should be for flowing alcohol. Many times people simplify this term and say for example “30 lb injectors”.  This usually means 30 pounds per hour. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Injector Rated Pres, PSI 
Is the fuel pressure in PSI at which the Injector Rating is rated. 
Operating Fuel Pres, PSI 
Is the operating fuel pressure delivered to the injector when installed on the engine.  For example, say an injector is rated at 30 lb/hr with a Injector Rated Pres of 40 PSI.  If you run it on the engine with an Operating Fuel Pres of 60 PSI, it will flow much more than 30 lb/hr.  Many times the operating pressure is increased to provide enough fuel for supercharged engines.  
Pressure Control 
This combo box lets you select the method used to control Operating Fuel Pres.  If the fuel pressure is regulated to manifold vacuum or pressure, select “Reg to Man Pres” or “Reg to Boost Pres”.  (The Boost Pres item means exactly the same as Man Pres, but we thought some people may recognize the word “Boost” and not “Man.”) This type of system usually has a vacuum line connected from the fuel pressure regulator to the intake manifold.  If you measure fuel pressure with a gauge, you will see regulated fuel pressure increase as you open the throttle and manifold pressure increases (manifold vacuum drops).  This type of system generally holds a constant pressure drop across the injector. Therefore, fuel flow will not change with manifold pressure changes unless the electrical signal to the injector changes. 
If the pressure is regulated to atmospheric pressure or simply has a regulator which holds a constant pressure, choose “Hold Const. Pres”. These types of systems hold fuel pressure constant no matter what the manifold pressure or supercharger boost. 
Total # Injectors on Engine 
Is the total number of injectors on the engine.  The program assumes all injectors are identical and operate the same. 
Firing Method 
Is the number of times one injector fires in one complete engine cycle (2 revolutions or 720 degrees).  Most systems with 1 injector for each cylinder fire the injectors only once each cycle so choose “Once/Cycle (2 revs)”. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Carburetor Specs 
The Engine Analyzer Pro lets you simulate some basic carburetor operation to understand how engine and carburetor modifications affect carburetor performance.  Carburetors are nearly as complicated as the engine itself. Many simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the carburetor specs to those you see here.  Most assumptions are based on a typical Holley 4 barrel. 
WARNING: Although recommended jet sizes may work well in some cases, DO NOT use them to jet your carb.  Due to the many carb assumptions made by the Pro, recommended jet sizes should only be used to show trends. 
# Primary Venturis 
Is the total # of primary carburetor venturis on the engine.  Table 2.10 gives some examples. 
Table 2.10, Examples of # Primary Venturis and # Secondary Venturis 
Intake System  # Primary Venturis  # Secondary Venturis  
Single 4 barrel carb  2  2  
Dual 4 barrels  4  4  
Three 2 barrel carbs, (ex. Mopar “Six Pack”)  2  4  
Four cylinder engine with Ind Runner  4  0  
“Non Staged” 2 barrel carb (ex. Holley 500)  2  0  
Staged 2 barrel carb (Ford 2300, Pinto 2 barrel)  1  1  

# Secondary Venturis 
Is the total # of secondary carburetor venturis on the engine.  Table 2.11 gives some examples. 
Primary Venturi Diameter, in 
Is the diameter of the main venturi (not booster venturi) in a primary throttle bore in inches.  This is not the throttle plate diameter. 
Secondary Venturi Diameter, in 
Is the diameter of the main venturi (not booster venturi) in a secondary throttle bore in inches.  This is not the throttle plate diameter. 
Power Valve 
This combo box lets you pick the diameter of the power valve restrictor channel in inches, and whether the power valve is only for the primaries or for both the primaries and secondaries.  For some diameters, an example is given, however, your particular carb may be different. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Venturi Discharge Coef 
Describes the strength of the fuel metering signal generated by the carburetor booster venturi.  Most carburetor booster venturis have a discharge coefficient of approximately .75 .  Special "high strength" boosters, Holley's "annular discharge" booster, double boosters (a booster venturi within a booster venturi) will have CD's of .55 to .65.  The lower the number, the higher the booster signal (the more venturi suction) for a given air flow. 
If you have flow bench data of venturi signal for various amounts of air flow through the carb, click on the Clc button to calculate venturi CD.  See Section 2.9.13. 
Note: Many carbs will have different venturi CDs on the secondary venturis than the primary venturis.  Use the average of the primary and secondary CDs for venturi CD if you calculate it from flow bench data.  Also remember that the actual carb will need a larger jet for the venturis with the larger CDs.  Differences between primary and secondary venturi CDs are not accounted for in the program. 
Air Bleed 
This combo box lets you pick the approximate size of the air bleed for the primary (and secondary) metering systems.  The actual carburetor's air bleed rating, % is nearly impossible to determine except under actual running or "wet flow bench" testing.  Use this parameter only to understand how the air bleed system works.  An air bleed rating, % of 0 would be no air bleed opening.  An air bleed rating, % of 100% would be for an air bleed orifice approximately as large as the main jet. 
Notes: The air bleed rating is the only carburetor spec which can not be measured directly.  Therefore, set all other carb specs including calculating the venturi CD from flow bench data.  Then adjust the air bleed rating until the Primary Jet and Secondary Jet match the diameters of the metering jets you are using (assuming the jets you are using give 12.5 A/F for gas or 5.0 A/F for alcohol). 
The goal of most carburetors is to deliver the same A/F for all RPMs.  You'll know if you have reached this goal if the Primary Jet and Secondary Jet are nearly the same at all RPMs.  By adjusting the venturi CD and air bleed rating, you can usually obtain a nearly constant Primary Jet and Secondary Jet.  Restricted engines (engines where class rules dictate a carb much smaller than optimum) usually require more air bleed rating and a higher venturi CD (less metering signal) for constant Primary Jet and Secondary Jet (and constant A/F) at all RPMs. 
Many carbs will have different air bleeds on the secondary venturis than the primary venturis.  This detail is not accounted for in the program. 
See Example 4.1, “For Advanced Users” for more detail. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.5 Exhaust System Specs 
The Exhaust System specs affect exhaust system tuning and flow losses due to restrictions in the exhaust manifold or header and exhaust/muffler system. 
Exhaust System Specs have been expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated 
info. 
Header Primary Specs (x rnnr/cyl): 
The "x rnnr/cyl" depends on the current value of # Valves/Ports under Exhaust Port specs in the Head(s) menu.  If x=2 or 3, then the Header Specs of Design, Inside Dia at Head, Total Length, Runner Flow Coef and Inside Dia at Exit describe only 1 of the 2 or 3 exhaust header or manifold runners for each cylinder. 
Important:  Click on the See Layout button at the bottom of this menu to see how your input specs are being used by the program. 

Design 
This combo box lets you pick the general design of the exhaust runner: 
• 
Straight with no diameter change from the head to the collector or exit to atmosphere 

• 
Constant taper from the head to the collector or exit to atmosphere 

• 
Stepped, with a relatively small diameter change at some distance from the head 


Inside Dia at Head, in 
Is the inside diameter of the header or exhaust manifold runners at the head. If you know your header tubing outer diameter, simply subtract .1 inches to obtain the approximate inside diameter  For example:
 1 7/8" Headers: Tubing O.D. = 1.875 Inside Diameter = 1.875 - .1 = 1.775 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
If the runners are oval or rectangular or you have runner volume in CCs (usually used only for exhaust manifolds), click on the Clc button to calculate the effective diameter.  See Section 2.9.3, 
Note: The exhaust runner dimensions are not as critical as the intake runner dimensions.  It is generally “overkill” to “cc" the primary header pipes.  Simply estimating the inside diameter by subtracting .1 from the tubing OD is adequate. 
Total Length, in 
Is the length of the exhaust runner from the exhaust port in the head (not including the exhaust port) to the first "abrupt enlargement" of the runner downstream of the exhaust port. The "abrupt enlargement" can be several different things: 
• 
The header collector where individual tubes merge together. 

• 
The end which is open to atmosphere on individual runner exhaust headers.  

• 
Any point where a runner from one cylinder merges with a runner from another cylinder. 


Most production exhaust manifolds have runners 2 to 8 inches in length.  Production manifolds and headers for performance engines generally have longer runners to take advantage of exhaust tuning effects, 12-24 inches.  Aftermarket headers generally have a length of 20-40 inches. 
Runner Flow Coef 
Is similar to the Runner Flow Coef discussed in the Intake System section.  Runner Flow Coef mostly affects flow restriction and only slightly affects exhaust tuning.  (This is a change from Version 1.2 where this parameter had a stronger influence on exhaust tuning.)  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.5. 
See Section 2.9.7 for how to calculate Runner Flow Coef.  Even if you do not have flow bench data, review Section 2.9.7 for an understanding of how the Valve and Runner Flow Coefs relate to each other.  If you do not have flow data, use Table 2.11 to estimate the Runner Flow Coef for typical exhaust manifolds and headers. 
Table 2.11, Estimate Exhaust Runner Flow Coef 
Description  Typical Runner Flow Coef  
Production, non performance manifolds  .7 - 2.0  
Production, performance manifolds with longer runners, smooth bends  1.0 - 2.0  
Aftermarket, “street” headers (typically more bends to clear frame, provide for easy installation, etc.)  1.0 - 2.5  
Aftermarket, “race” headers (designed primarily for low restriction, good tuning characteristics)  1.5 - 3.0  

Exhaust/Muffler System 

 Open Headers 


 Full Exhaust 


Click on the option button which describes your exhaust system.  If you choose Open Headers, the CFM Rating spec is disabled, because that is the CFM Rating of the exhaust system, not the headers. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
CFM Rating 
Is the "vehicle exhaust system and muffler restriction rating" and describes the design of the exhaust system.  It is very similar to a carb or throttle body Total CFM Rating in the Intake System Specs menu.   
The CFM Rating is measured in CFM (Cubic Feet per Minute) maintaining a 1.5" Hg (inches of mercury, or 20.4 inches of water) pressure drop across the entire exhaust system.  Exhaust system flow data is becoming  more common in magazine articles and performance "how to" books.  However, the pressure drop used for doing the flow tests may not be 20.4".  If not, use the following formula to obtain CFM flows corrected to 20.4": 
CFM @ 20.4” =  CFM @ XX” ×
      20.4                                                         XX Where XX is the actual test pressure in inches of water 
Also, if they flow each side of the exhaust system separately, simply add the two CFM values obtained. 
     For example, a magazine article says the right side of a particular exhaust system flows 270 CFM at 28" water.             First, convert 270 CFM @ 28" to CFM at 20.4" 

                CFM @ 20.4" = 270 *  = 270 * .854 = 230 CFM
     Second, add left and right side flows together to obtain total exhaust system flow (assuming the left flows equal to the right) 
                Total flow = Lt flow + Rt flow = 230 + 230 = 460 CFM 
If you do not have flow data, use Table 2.12 to estimate the CFM Rating or click on the Clc button to calculate CFM as explained in Section 2.9.14.      
Table 2.12, Estimate CFM Rating 
Designed Engine Power in Horsepower  CFM Rating  
Quiet  Sporty  Race  
0 - 50 51 - 100 101 - 150 151 - 200 201 - 250 251 - 300 301 - 400 401 - 600 601 - 1000 1000- 2000  20 60 100 140 180 220 280 400 640 1200  40 120 200 280 360 440 560 800 1280 2400  120 360 600 840 1080 1320 1680 2400 3840 7200  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
   Definitions for Table 2.12: 
• 
Quiet is a production exhaust system for a family sedan or luxury sedan where a "throaty" engine roar is undesirable. 

• 
Sporty is a production exhaust system for performance/sports cars.  

• 
Race is an exhaust system with extremely low back pressure, designed for classes of racing where rules require mufflers. 

• 
For open headers/no exhaust system, enter a very large value of CFM, for example 100000 CFM. 


Note:  As a double check, this is the range of Exhaust Back Pressures (Exh Pres) you should obtain when calculating performance for the various CFM Ratings: 
Quiet = 7 to 12 PSI at the RPM for peak HP Sporty = 2 to 8 PSI at the RPM for peak HP Race = .5 to 3 PSI at the RPM for peak HP Open Headers = 0 PSI 
If you have the exhaust system mounted on the engine you are simulating with the Pro', you can verify the CFM Rating by actually measuring the exhaust pressure in PSI.  Weld a hose fitting to the exhaust pipe as close as practical to the header or manifold.  Attach a hose from the fitting to a TEMPORARY pressure gauge OUTSIDE the vehicle. For example, tie it to a windshield wiper so it can be read inside the car.  The gauge should be for reading low pressures, like 5 PSI full scale for accurate measurements.  Make a full power acceleration in the vehicle and see if the measured pressure matches the Pro's Exh Pres. 
SAFETY NOTE:  Do not run an exhaust pressure line into the car.  This is to prevent carbon monoxide poisoning. 
Collector Specs 

 None 


 Simple 


 Detailed 


Click the appropriate option button for your exhaust system design and for the level of detail (and calculation time required) in the calculations.  See the definitions below: 
• 
None says each exhaust header empties separately to atmosphere, like “zoomies” on a blown, nitro dragster.  Selecting this options disables all collector specs. 

• 
Simple says each exhaust header combines into a common pipe of large diameter, usually called a collector.  For engines with # of Cylinders greater than 5, the Pro assumes there are 2 collectors, each with half of the header pipes from engine’s cylinders. Selecting this options disables collector diameter and taper angle.  During development it became evident that the collector specs were having too much effect on the results.  In actual engines, the size and length of the collector generally is not too critical.  Therefore, to simplify the calculations (which saves considerable calculation time) and produce results more in line with typical engines, we developed this option. 

• 
Detailed says each exhaust header combines into a common pipe of large diameter, usually called a collector.  For engines with # of Cylinders greater than 5, the Pro assumes there are 2 collectors, each with half of the header pipes from engine’s cylinders.  Selecting this options enables all collector specs.  Generally selecting this option will let the collector have too much effect on calculated performance.  In actual engines, the size and length of the collector generally is not too critical. This option can be useful for those who want to see how collector specs should effect performance, and at what RPMs.  However, you must keep in mind if a change shows a 40 HP change at a particular RPM, that the real change may be more like 5 HP instead.  This option can also be useful for “cutting edge” engines like Pro Stock or Formula 1.  For these highly tuned engines, collector specs may have more effect, like that shown by the program.  More refinements will be made as we gain more experience. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Collector Length, in 
Is the length of the collector from the end of the header primary or exhaust manifold runner to the next abrupt enlargement.  This abrupt enlargement is usually the opening to atmosphere for open headers.  For exhaust systems, it would usually be the catalyst or muffler. 
Collector Dia, in 
Is the diameter of the collector at the end which attaches to the header primary(s) or exhaust manifold runner(s).  You can click on the Clc button to have the program estimate the Collector Dia based on the diameter of the header primary(s) or exhaust manifold runner(s), their number and a percent change in cross sectional area.  Click on the Clc button to calculate a diameter from the Header Primary Diameter specs as explained in Section 2.9.15. 
Collector Taper, deg 
Is the angle for the taper of the collector. For collectors with no area change (straight, constant diameter pipe), enter 0.  For collectors which taper out (larger diameter or area at the exit of the collector) enter the number of degrees.  Although this would be rather unusual, enter a negative number (-) of degrees if the collector gets smaller at the exit.  Click on the Clc button to calculate the Taper angle based on diameters or areas and collector length. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.6 Cam/Valve Train 

Cam Valve Train Specs have been greatly expanded in later versions, with many new inputs and features.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
The Cam/Valve Train specs describe the opening and closing of the valves, valve train weights, spring rates and stiffness of components.  Because there are so many different ways of specifying cam specs, the Pro includes a menu called Alternate Cam Specs. Click on the See Alternate Specs button at the bottom of the screen if you have specs which do not match those shown in the main Cam/Valve Train menu shown.  This Alternate Cam Specs menu is discussed later in this section. 
Note:  Alternate Cam Specs were incorporated into the main Cam Screen in v3.3 because computer screen resolutions increased. This allowed more info to be displayed on one screen. 
Cam and valve train specifications are critical to engine performance; therefore reliable information is necessary.  It is recommended that you use specifications given by the cam grinder or engine manufacturer.  Actual measurements of cam and valve train specifications can be done, however this can be tricky and therefore is recommended to have someone experienced perform them.  Guides for making these measurements are also available from cam grinders and manufacturers of valve train components and are beyond the scope of this User's Manual. 
For additional reference, see Example 4.2 and Appendix 8.  Performance Trends' Cam Analyzer program can help you to make these measurements.  It can also be used to create Cam Dr (tm) files, which can be used by the Pro for detailed analysis of a particular cam profile.  See Cam File on page 43 for using Cam Dr (tm) files. 
Version 3.9 allows you to communicating directly with the Cam Analyzer, allowing for much easier importing of cam files from Cam Analyzer. 
Intake Cam Profile 
Centerline, deg ATDC 
Is the location of the maximum lift point on the cam profile.  If you are using the program’s standard cam profiles, this is also exactly half way between the open and closing point because the program assumes the same opening and closing profile.  This is not necessarily the case if you use a Cam File, which may have very different opening and closing profiles. Click on the Clc button or the See Alternate Specs button at the bottom of the menu to bring up the Alternate Cam Specs menu.  There you can enter Opening and Closing events at .050” lift instead of Centerline and Duration.  Also see Appendix 8 and Example 4.2. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Duration @ .050” 
Is the number of crank degrees where the tappet is lifted at least .050 inches above base circle.  This will correlate to most cam grinder’s spec of “duration @ .050 inches lift”. This has become an aftermarket standard.  Be sure not to use “seat timing” or “advertised duration”, as these are usually much larger numbers. Click on the Clc button or the See Alternate Specs button at the bottom of the menu to bring up the Alternate Cam Specs menu. There you can enter Opening and Closing events at .050” lift instead of Centerline and Duration.  Also see Appendix 8 and Example 4.2. 

Max Lobe Lift, in 
Identifies how high the cam lobe lifts the tappet above Base Circle in inches.  If you are given "gross valve lift" by the cam grinder, divide by the rocker arm ratio assumed by the cam grinder to obtain gross or maximum tappet lift.  This can also be done in the Alternate Cam Specs menu.  Click on the Clc button  or the See Alternate Specs button at the bottom of the menu to bring up the Alternate Cam Specs menu.  Also see Appendix 8 and Example 4.2. 
Actual Lash @ Valve, in 
Identifies the lash or clearance in inches between the valve tip and its actuator, generally the rocker arm.  If you have specified a hydraulic Lifter (profile) Type, this spec is disabled. 
Notes:  This spec works with the Designed Valve Lash spec.  If you specify an Actual Valve Lash nearly the same as the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened as the cam profile was designed.  If you specify a smaller Actual Valve Lash than the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened longer and higher than what the cam was designed for. And vice versa, if you specify a larger Actual Valve Lash than the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened less time and less lift than what the cam was designed for. 
Rocker Arm Ratio 
Identifies the ratio between tappet lift and valve lift.  Generally rocker arm ratios vary between 1.3 to 1.8.  For valve trains with no rocker arms, for example overhead cam systems with directing acting tappets, enter 1.  See Figure 2.22.  The Pro assumes the ratio is constant although actual rocker arm ratios vary slightly with valve lift. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

 Use Specs Above  Use Cam File 
Cam File 
The Engine Analyzer Pro allows you to specify the cam lobe at every 2 crank degrees (1 cam degree) by reading several different types of cam files.  These files include” "Cam Dr (tm)" , "Competition Cams (tm)", “Doctor Dr (tm)” and “S96 (tm)” files.  Although, the Pro can approximate most cam profiles quite closely from just the simple specs described above, this is the only way to simulate the exact cam profile you are using. 
If you have a cam lobe data file you want to use, choose the Use Cam File option button.  This will disable some specs in the Cam/Valve Train menu and enable the Cam File Pick button.  Click on the Pick button and a standard Windows menu opens so you can pick any file any place in the computer.  Find the file and click OK. The program will warn you if it is not a file format it recognizes. The file name and path will be loaded into the Cam File text box.  You can not change this name in the text box directly, but only by using the Pick button.  See Example 4.2. 
Cam Dr (tm) files usually end with ".cxx" where xx is the cylinder #.  Each Cam Dr file consists of an intake and exhaust lobe. The Engine Analyzer Pro will only read the intake lobe data as an intake lobe and the exhaust lobe data as an exhaust lobe for the calculations. However, you can use one cam data file for the intake profile and a different one for the exhaust profile.   
Complete Cam Dr files also include ".des" and ".msu" files which include comments, camshaft data, rocker arm ratio, etc.  Because the Pro already knows lobe center, rocker arm ratio, etc., these additional files are not needed.  Performance Trends' Cam Analyzer computer program can create Cam Dr (tm) files from dial indicator and degree wheel readings.  Contact Performance Trends for more information. 
Competition Cams files are only for 1 lobe, and can be used for either intake or exhaust.  The format for a Competition Cams file is relatively simple: 
   The first 42 records or lines are simply text or comments, and are ignored by the Engine Analyzer Pro 
   The next 360 records are cam degrees and cam lift, for example: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
1 .000 
2 .001 
3 .003 
. . 
. . 
359 .000 
360 .000 
The cam degrees are not used, but a number must be included at this location.  The cam lift data can start at any place, even in the middle of a lobe.  The minimum lift (base circle) need not be zero, but can be either above or below zero. Because the Competition Cams format is simple and very general, experienced computer users may be able to write these lobe files from other data or specs they have. 
Overall Cam Specs 
Total Cam Advance 
This combo box lets you either pick an advance, retard or “straight up” cam timing by clicking on the arrow key, or you can type in an advance or retard in degrees directly.  If you just enter a number, a number with a + sign (ex. +4) or a number followed by the letters “adv”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam advance.  If you just enter a number with a - sign (ex. -4) or a number followed by the letters “ret”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam retard. 
Total cam advance is based on the current Intake and Exhaust Centerlines.  If the centerlines are equal, Total Advance is set to 0 or straight up by the program.  This is a major change from version 1.1 and 1.2 where the spec Additional Cam Advance was used. In those versions you could specify opening and closing events which would produce a Total Cam Advance of say 4 degrees, but the Additional Cam Advance could be set to 0.  This was confusing to users.  This new method of using Total Cam Advance should match cam specs used by most cam grinders. 
To change cam timing from how it was ground by the cam grinder you will need special set of timing gears or an offset timing pin, key or bushing. In general, advancing the cam will give more lower end torque while giving up some top end HP; and retarding will give up low end torque to gain top end HP. 
Designed Valve Lash, in 
Is the valve lash the cam grinder recommends you use, or what the cam was ground for.  If the cam grinder recommends a  different lash for the exhaust than the intake, use the intake lash.  See Actual Lash @ Valve a couple pages back. 
Lifter (profile) Type 
This combo box lets you pick the type of lifter and the “steepness” or “aggressiveness” of the cam’s profiles.  The combinations consist of: 
Hyd vs Solid Hydraulic vs Solid lash adjustment Flat vs Roller Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile (Roller being more aggressive) Mild vs Agr Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile  (Agr being more aggressive) Invrtd The most aggressive or steep profile  (being more aggressive than Mild or Agr) 
The choice of Hydraulic vs Solid is the most important as this dictates the use of a lash setting (even if you are using a Cam File) and whether hydraulic lifter pumpup is possible.  The other choices simply determine differences in the steepness of the profile 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
for the same Max Lobe Lift.. Most truly aggressive cams or roller cams have more Max Lobe Lift for a given duration, and milder or hydraulic cams have less Max Lobe Lift. 
Exhaust Cam Profile Centerline, deg ATDC Duration @ .050” Max Lobe Lift, in Actual Lash @ Valve, in 
 Use Specs Above  Use Cam File Cam File 
Definitions for these specs are the same as for the Intake Cam Profile described previously. 
Calculate Valve Train Dynamics 
 Yes  No 
Select Yes if you want the Engine Analyzer Pro to simulate valve train dynamics (bending and tossing) based on the cam profile, weights, stiffnesses and spring rates entered in the Valve Train Specs menu.  This menu is displayed if you choose Yes and click on the See Specs for Dynamics. 
Select No and the Engine Analyzer Pro will calculate valve lift exactly as dictated by the cam lobe, lash and rocker arm ratio. The weights, stiffnesses and spring rates in the Valve Train Specs menu are not used.  This is recommended if you do not have accurate specs for the valve train. This is similar to a "perfect" valve train with components which have no mass and are perfectly stiff.  Eliminating dynamics can give significantly different torque and HP results, usually more HP and less low RPM torque. 
2.6.1 Alternate Cam/ Valve Train Specs 
Note: These Alternate Cam Specs were incorporated into the main Cam Screen in v3.3 because computer screen resolutions increased. This allowed more info to be displayed on one screen. The inputs and outputs show here are now on the main Cam screen. 
Shown to the right is the menu for entering alternate cam and valve train specs. Most of these are the same as on the main Cam/Valve Train specs menu  and will not be explained again.  Only specs which have not been explained 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
previously in this section will be explained. 
This screen is very useful for entering different types of cam specs than what is available in the main Cam/Valve Train menu. This screen will calculate the specs for the main Cam/Valve Train based on these inputs.  Examples of these conversions include: 
Calculate  From  
Centerline and Duration  Opening and Closing  
Centerlines  Separation and Advance  
Max Lobe Lift  Rocker Arm Ratio and Gross Valve Lift  
Cam Advance  One Centerline and Lobe Separation  
Centerline  The other Centerline and Lobe Separation  

For example, if you know Intake Opening @ .050” and Closing @ .050”, you can enter them in this menu to obtain the resulting Intake Centerline and Duration @ .050”.  When you return to the main Cam/Valve Train menu, the correct Centerline and Duration @ .050” will be transferred from this alternate menu back to the main Cam/Valve Train menu. 
Intake Cam Profile 
Opening @ .050” 
Identifies crankshaft degrees before top dead center where the tappet has been lifted .050 inches above Base Circle on the opening ramp.  This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs.  If this event occurs after top dead center, enter a negative value. For example, it is reported as 4 degrees after top dead center, enter -4. 
Closing @ .050” 
Identifies crankshaft degrees after bottom dead center where the tappet has been lowered to .050 inches above Base Circle on the closing ramp.  This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs.  It is highly unlikely, but if this event occurs before bottom dead center, enter a negative value.  For example, it is reported as 4 degrees before bottom dead center, enter -4. 
Gross Valve Lift 
Is the maximum lift of the valve with NO valve lash (even if it is a mechanical cam with valve lash).  Mathematically it is Max Lobe Lift  multiplied by rocker arm ratio.  This is the standard way most cam grinders rate their cams for valve lift. 
Note: If you are not using the same Rocker Arm Ratio as what the cam grinder is assuming, then first enter the cam grinder’s Gross Valve Lift and assumed Rocker Arm Ratio.  This will give the  cam’s true Max Lobe Lift.  Then change the Rocker Arm Ratio to the actual ratio you are using and you will see Gross Valve Lift change to be correct for your rocker arm ratio. 
Lobe Separation, cam deg 
Is the separation between the intake and exhaust centerlines in cam (not crankshaft) degrees, and is the standard method used by most cam grinders. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.6.2 Valve Train Dynamics Menu 
The Valve Train Dynamics menu shown here is displayed if you choose the Yes option for Calculate Valve Train Dynamics and then click on the See Specs for Dynamics.  These specs are used to determine the valve train dynamics (bending and tossing) for the engine being tested.  (For 4 valve engines, see note on page 49.) 
The Valve Train Dynamics Specs have been greatly expanded in later versions, with many new inputs and features. See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Enterprise Edition adds even more details to simulate Valve Spring Dynamaics. See Appendix 13. 
Intake Valve Train Specs 
Valve Train Type 
This combo box determines what components are present in the valve train.  Your choice here can disable some specs in this menu or change their names. 
Eff Valve Mass, gms 
Describes the mass or weight of the valve train components on the valve side of the rocker arm in grams.  This is a portion of the total mass which the cam lobe must open and the valve spring must close.  This mass can be calculated by weighing the valve train components and clicking on the Clc button as explained in Section 2.9.16. (For 4 valve engines, see note on page 49.) 
Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss, lb/in 
Is the effective rocker arm stiffness measured in pounds per inch.  Although the rocker arm seems completely solid, it does possess a certain amount of "springiness".  The lower the Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss, the "springier" the valve train.  This "springiness" can cause valve toss problems at high RPM.  Use Table 2.13 to estimate Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss,lb/in. (For 4 valve engines, see note on page 49.) 
Table 2.13 Examples of Effective Rocker Arm Stiffness 

Description of Valve Train  Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss, lb/in  
Pushrod with Poor Design Production Stamped Steel Rocker Arm  22,000  
Pushrod with Better Design Production Stamped Steel Rocker Arm  26,000  
Pushrod with Production Cast Iron Rocker Arm (like small block Chevy)  30,000  
Pushrod with Good Aftermarket Rocker Arm (aftermarket may sacrifice stiffness to lower weight)  30,000  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Extremely long rocker arms (big block Chevy, Ford Boss 429, etc)  Subtract about 2000 lb/in  
Adding Stud Girdles to Pushrod System  Add about 10000 lb/in  
OHC Rocker Arm systems  Add about 10000 lb/in to Pushrod systems values. Note: Stamped steel is not generally used in OHC systems  

If you selected Direct Acting OHC as the Valve Train Type, this spec is disabled  See Section 2.9.17 on how to calculate Eff Rckr Arm Stffns from a special test. 
Eff Lifter Mass, gms Rocker Arm Mass, gms 
Describes the mass or weight of the valve train components on the lifter side of the rocker arm in grams. This mass can be calculated by weighing the valve train components and clicking on Clc as explained in Section 2.9.18. 
If you selected one of the Valve Train Designs with rocker arms but no lifter, this spec is called Rocker Arm Mass.  Then enter the mass of the rocker arm alone, without the mounting shaft, fulcrum, etc. (For 4 valve engines, see note on page 49.) 
Eff Lifter Stiffness, lb/in 
Is the effective stiffness of the lifter and pushrod in units of pounds per inch of deflection.  Both these components are quite stiff and we recommend using 100,000 lbs per inch.  We will provide better estimates as we obtain more data and experience.  In this version of the program, this spec can not be changed and is marked Program will guess. This is to make the program easier for most users. This specs may again be made available if there is enough interest. 
This input may be important to your analysis if you are doing detailed valve train dynamics analysis, (strained gauged push rods, "Spintron" testing, etc).  In those cases, you may want or need to reduce Eff Lifter Stiffness, especially for hydraulic lifters. 
Spring Rate, lb/in (C) 
Describes the stiffness of the valve spring in pounds of force required to compress the spring 1 inch.  This can be calculated by the following equation:
 change in spring force, pounds Spring Rate, lb/in = change in spring length, inches 

For example, one cam grinder's catalog gives a force at the "checking height" of 1.65" of 110 lbs, and a force at the "open height" of 1.15 inches of 290 lbs.  This would give:
 290 - 110 180 
Spring Rate, lb/in = 
= = 327 lb/in 
1.65 - 1.10 .55 
See Section 2.9.19 for calculating spring rate by clicking on the Clc button. (For 4 valve engines, see note on page 49.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Seated Spring Force, lbs 
Is the force in pounds exerted by the valve spring on the valve when the valve is closed.  See Section 2.9.19 for calculating seated spring force by clicking on the Clc button.  (For 4 valve engines, see note on page 49.) 
Exhaust Valve Train Specs 
Valve Train Type 
Eff Valve Mass, gms 
Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss, lb/in 
Eff Lifter Mass or Rocker Arm Mass 
Eff Lifter Stiffness, lb/in 
Spring Rate, lb/in 
Seated Spring Force, lbs 
These exhaust Valve Train Dynamics Specs are used in the same manner as the intake parameters described in this section. 
Notes for 4 Valve Engines 
The program is primarily set up assuming you are working with 2 valve engines.  There are 2 basic ways to use the Valve Train Dynamics portion for 4 valve engines: 
Method 1:  Characterize the Intake or Exhaust Valves as 1 Valve 
For this method, you would enter (or calculate) the effective weight of 1 valve and 1 lifter (follower) and obtain the rocker arm stiffness of 1 rocker arm.  You would enter (or calculate) the spring rates of just 1 of the valve springs. 
Method 2:  Characterize the Intake or Exhaust Valves as 2 Valves 
For this method, you would enter (or calculate) the effective weight of both valves and both lifters (followers) and obtain the rocker arm stiffness of  both rocker arms together. You would enter (or calculate) the spring rates of both valve springs together.  This method  (# 2) is more accurate, primarily because the program estimating the cylinder pressure against the valve face for 2 valves (very important on the exhaust side). 
Obviously for 3 intake or exhaust valves, you would factor the weights, stiffnesses and spring rates up by a factor of 3 instead of just a factor of 2. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.7 Turbo/Supercharger Specs 
If you click on the Turbo/Supercharger Specs button, you are presented with the 4 choices shown to the right.  Select the type of supercharger system, then click on the View Specs button to open the appropriate menu.  These menus and their specs are described in this section. 
Turbocharger and Supercharger Specs have been expanded in later versions with new inputs.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
None 
Choose None to indicate the engine is not equipped with any type of supercharger or turbocharger.  All specs in these menu are then ignored in the calculations. 
Roots Supercharger Specs 
Note: V3.9 B added 4 new “Modern” types of Roots Superchargers, which are much more efficient.  Check Appendix 

12, page 277 for more details. 
Choose Roots Supercharger if the engine is equipped with a belt driven, positive displacement "Roots" supercharger, like those produced by B&M (tm), Weiand (tm) or the "original" GMC 6-71.  A "Roots" compressor looks more like a typical engine oil pump, where a volume of gas is trapped and then forced into the intake manifold.  The advantages of an ideal "Roots" supercharger is that a relatively constant boost level can be maintained from low RPM to high RPM.
 However, the disadvantages of the "Roots" supercharger include: 
• 
Higher internal friction due to large seals rubbing on surfaces 

• 
Internal leakage reduces boost at lower RPM 

• 
Lower thermal efficiency than a centrifugal supercharger 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Volume/Revolution, cu in 
A "Roots" blower develops boost when the mass of air it pumps to the engine is greater than the mass of air the engine could accept at zero boost. In order for the engine to accept this mass of air it must be compressed, so a given mass of air occupies less volume.  Therefore, a "Roots" supercharger boost level is directly related to the mass of air it can pump.  This mass of air depends on supercharger RPM (engine RPM and belt ratio) and supercharger swept volume per revolution.  The Volume/Revolution spec is critical and is generally available from the supercharger manufacturer.   
The Volume/Revolution for GMC blowers can be calculated from the following equations:
        For Small Diameter (5.5") Rotors             Volume/Revolution, cu in = rotor length, inches x 22.64
        For Large Diameter (5.8") Rotors             Volume/Revolution, cu in = rotor length, inches x 27.45
        For example, for a 6-71 with 5.8" diameter by 15" long rotors: 
Volume/Revolution, cu in = 15" x 27.45 = 412 
Leakage (seals) 
Roots superchargers must trap a volume of air and "shove" it into the engine's intake.  However, this trapped air can leak out along several feet of sealing edges.  At low speed, this trapped air has a lot of time to leak out which reduces boost.  At very low speed (10 RPM), a Roots supercharger will produce no boost since all the air will eventually leak out.  At high speed, less time is available for portions of each "chunk" of air to leak out.  Therefore, the percent of air leaking out will decrease and boost will increase at higher speed. 
Various Leakage ratings can be picked by clicking on the arrow button of the combo box.  The more “leaky” the Leakage rating, the lower the boost level, especially at low RPM.  However, the advantage to leaky seals is there is less internal friction in the supercharger. This is not significant at full throttle power levels, but is significant in street driving situations.  Leaky seals therefore give much better street fuel economy. 
The Pro simulates both the change in boost levels and frictional drag depending on your choice of Leakage rating. 
Mech Friction 
Identifies any change in rubbing friction compared to a typical Roots supercharger with the Leakage rating chosen. 
Belt Ratio 
Is the ratio between the drive pulley mounted on the engine crankshaft and the driven pulley on the Roots supercharger.  This ratio identifies the amount of difference between engine RPM and supercharger RPM.  Belt Ratio can be calculated by the equation below or by clicking on the Clc button as shown in Section 2.9.20. 
        Belt Ratio =Crank Pulley Diameter, inches                             S/C Pulley Diameter, inches 
Many people talk about the % overdrive or underdrive of a supercharger.  The equation to convert Belt Ratio to % overdrive is: 
% Overdrive = (Belt Ratio - 1) x 100% 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
For example, if the Belt Ratio is 1.5, the % Overdrive would be (1.5-1) x 100% or  50% Overdrive.  If the Belt Ratio is .8 the % Overdrive would be (.8-1) x 100% or -20% Overdrive or 20% Underdrive. 
Safety Note:  You must follow the supercharger manufacturer's recommendations for maximum belt ratios, maximum engine RPM and maximum supercharger RPM. 
Peak Thermal Eff. 
Is the peak thermal efficiency of the Roots compressor.  Roots compressors do not have as high a thermal efficiency as centrifugal compressors.  That is because the a Roots supercharger simply pumps air against a restriction (the engine) to compress it.  In centrifugal compressors and special designs of positive displacement superchargers, the air is gradually compressed and gently delivered to the engine.  Continual, gentle compression is more efficient. 
A good estimate for Peak Thermal Eff. for a typical Roots S/C is 50-55%.  The highest likely efficiency for an actual Roots supercharger is 60%, and the lowest could be 40%.  For special designs of positive displacement superchargers (Lysolm, Whipple (tm), PSI (tm), "screw type", or rotating vane) which perform gradual compression, add 5 to 10% Peak Thermal Eff., % . Other very high efficiencies are available for you to pick from to see how much efficiency effects performance. 
General Supercharger Specs 
Throttle Location 
This combo box lets you pick where the throttle body or carburetor is placed with respect to the compressor.  If the carb or throttle body is before the compressor, pick Draw Through.  If the carb or throttle body is after the compressor, pick Blow Through. The carb or throttle body is less restrictive in the Blow Through position. Throttle Location can have a significant effect on carburetor jet size requirements. 
Note: Blow Through is almost never used with Roots Superchargers. 
Max Boost Limit, PSI 
If supercharger conditions are such that it delivers boost greater than this specified level, the Engine Analyzer Pro assumes a mechanical safety valve is activated to limit boost.  For Roots superchargers, it assumes a pop off valve "bleeds off" excess boost after the supercharger.  Belt ratio is usually used to limit boost with Roots Superchargers, not a mechanical boost limit like a pop off valve.  Therefore, for most Roots Superchargers, enter a very high limit (which is essentially the same as no limit) like 100 PSI. 
Number of S/Cs 
Is the number of superchargers installed.  If you specify 1, the program assumes a super/charger system exactly as specified in this menu.  If you specify Number of S/Cs as 2 and a Volume/Revolution of  140 cu in, the program assumes the supercharger can actually deliver 280 cu in/rev. 
Note: The program assumes 2 superchargers are installed in parallel. This means that half the air flow goes through each supercharger. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Intercooler Eff, % 
This combo box lets you pick the effectiveness of the intercooler to cool the intake charge.  An intercooler looks much like a radiator, but instead of cooling engine coolant, it cools the intake air charge.  A supercharger heats up the intake air considerably through the process of compression. Cool air is more dense than warm air.  More cool air can be packed into a given cylinder volume, producing more power.  The intercooler allows ambient air (non-compressed, surrounding air) to cool the charge.  If the intercooler is 100% effective, the intake charge would be brought down to its original (ambient) temperature as specified by Air Temp in the Weather Conditions in the Calculation Conditions menu with no change in boost pressure. 
Table 2.14 Descriptions of Intercooler Effectiveness 
Intercooler System  Description  
0% No Intercooler  No cooling of the intake charge takes place, that no intercooler is installed.  
25% Steady Runng Air-to-Air  The intake charge is brought back 25 % to its original temperature.  This level simulates a typical air-to-air intercooler which has been running continually at full boost for over 30 seconds or more. An intercooler's effectiveness tends to drop under sustained full boost operation as the intercooler tends to heat up.  
50% Quick Accel Air-to-Air  The intake charge is brought back 50 % to its original temperature.  This level simulates a typical air-to-air intercooler for a short “burst” to full boost from a light load condition. The intercooler will not be as hot and can cool the incoming air better until the intercooler heats up.  
75% Air-to-Water  The intake charge is brought back 75 % to its original temperature.  This level simulates a special intercooler which has a volume of  water around the fins. This intercooler is more effective because the water probably starts cooler than an air-to­air intercooler and the water takes longer to heat up (has more “thermal inertia”) than just an air cooled intercooler by itself.  
100% Air-to-Cold Water  The intake charge is brought back completely (100%) to its original temperature.  This level simulates a special intercooler which has a volume of cool water around the fins. This intercooler is more effective because the water starts much cooler than an air-to-air intercooler and the water takes longer to heat up than just an air cooled intercooler by itself.  
125% Air-to-Ice Water  The intake charge is cooled to even colder than its original temperature.  This level simulates a special intercooler which has a volume of cold water and ice around the fins. This intercooler is more effective because the water probably starts much colder than the surrounding air and takes very long to heat up.  
Other  Other types of intercoolers are possible which use freon, or water or alcohol sprays, or cooling fans to keep the intercooler very cold.  You will have to estimate how well these work and select from one of the 5 choices available.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Centrifugal Supercharger 

Pick the Centrifugal Supercharger option if the engine is equipped with a belt driven, centrifugal supercharger like a Paxton (tm) or Vortech (tm).  A centrifugal blower or compressor looks much like a typical engine water pump.  The impeller must be driven at very high speeds to create significant boost. Usually, there is a "speed increasing drive system" internal to the centrifugal compressor so the impeller is spinning much faster than its external drive pulley. 
In general terms, the boost of a centrifugal superchargers is directly related to the square of the RPM.  This means that if it will produce 3 PSI boost at 3000 RPM, it will produce 4 times that boost at twice that RPM (12 PSI at 6000 RPM).  Therefore, centrifugal supercharges can be quite "peaky", producing high boost over a narrow RPM range.  In addition, since high boost conditions at low speeds are unlikely, engines with centrifugal compressors are less prone to detonation (spark knock). 
Centrifugal Supercharger Specs have been expanded in later versions with new inputs.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. Enterprise Edition adds even more details.  See Appendix 13. 
Centrifugal Specs 
Centrifugal superchargers are basically a "belt driven" turbocharger.  A centrifugal compressor looks like, performs like, and is tested much like a turbocharger compressor.  The performance of a centrifugal compressor is also documented in a "map" like that shown in Figure 2.28. Therefore we will characterize the centrifugal supercharger with specs much like we use for a turbocharger.   
Centrifugal supercharger specs like those in this section are difficult for the average person to obtain.  The supercharger manufacturer may supply maps on request.  However, if you do not have specs, we recommend you use the specs which come preloaded in the Centrifugal Supercharger Library for common superchargers. 
This section refers to many items discussed in detail in the Turbocharger section which follows.  You may want to glance at it first before you read this section. 
Island CFM 
This spec is much like the turbocharger Island CFM.  The centrifugal compressor's Island CFM is the CFM at which the peak efficiency occurs on the "map".  For a typical street Paxton (tm) supercharger, this is approximately 320 CFM.  For larger superchargers like some Vortechs, this CFM will be from 500-900 CFM. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Island Pressure Ratio 
Is the pressure ratio (PR) where peak efficiency occurs just like for turbochargers.  PR is usually the vertical "Y" scale and in the range from 1.25 to 2.0 with a street Paxton (tm) being approximately 1.35 and different Vortechs being from 1.5 to 1.8. 
Island Efficiency, % 
Is the highest thermal efficiency on the compressor map in percent, just like for turbochargers.  The highest efficiency will occur in the center of the island.  Typical values range from 55 to 70% with a street Paxton (tm) being 62% and many Vortechs being from 70-76%. 
Island RPM 
Is the compressor RPM where peak efficiency occurs.  RPM lines are usually drawn on the compressor "map" as shown in Figure 2.28.  Typical values range from 25000 to 50000 RPM, with a Paxton (tm) being approximately 28000 RPM and various Vortechs being from 33000 to 40000 RPM. 
Internal Gear Ratio 
Centrifugal compressors must spin at relatively high RPM to produce significant boost.  Therefore, most compressors have some sort of "speed up" system so the rotor spins much faster than the compressor's external pulley.  Ratios of 4.4 and 3.45 are common for a Paxton or Vortech, respectively. 
Belt Ratio 
Is the ratio between the drive pulley mounted on the engine crankshaft and the driven pulley on the Centrifugal supercharger.  This ratio identifies the amount of speed increase between engine RPM and supercharger RPM.  Belt Ratio can be calculated by the equation below or by clicking on the Clc button as shown in Section 2.9.20. 
        Belt Ratio =Crank Pulley Diameter, inches                             S/C Pulley Diameter, inches 
Many people talk about the % overdrive or underdrive of a supercharger.  The equation to convert Ratio to % overdrive is: 
% Overdrive = (Belt Ratio - 1) x 100% 
For example, if the Belt Ratio is 1.5, the % Overdrive would be (1.5-1) x 100% or  50% Overdrive.  If the Belt Ratio is .8 the % Overdrive would be (.8-1) x 100% or -20% Overdrive or 20% Underdrive. 
Safety Note:  You must follow the supercharger manufacturer's recommendations for maximum belt ratios, maximum engine RPM and maximum supercharger RPM. 
Mech. Friction 
This combo box lets you pick a general friction rating for the supercharger. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Max Safe Impeller RPM 
This is the manufacturer’s safety limit on impeller RPM.  The program checks to ensure the belt ratio and engine RPM combination stays below this RPM, or you are given a warning in the Notes section of the Test results. 
Safety Note:  You must follow the supercharger manufacturer's recommendations for maximum belt ratios, maximum engine RPM and maximum supercharger RPM. 
General Supercharger Specs 
Throttle Location 
This combo box lets you pick where the throttle body or carburetor is placed with respect to the compressor.  If the carb or throttle body is before the compressor, pick Draw Through.  If the carb or throttle body is after the compressor, pick Blow Through. The carb or throttle body is less restrictive in the Blow Through position. Throttle Location can have a significant effect on carburetor jet size requirements. 
Note: Centrifugal superchargers use both Blow Through and Draw Through setups. 
Max Boost Limit, PSI 
If supercharger conditions are such that it delivers boost greater than this specified level, the Engine Analyzer Pro assumes a mechanical safety valve is activated to limit boost.  For Centrifugal superchargers, it assumes a pop off valve "bleeds off" excess boost after the supercharger.  Belt ratio is usually used to limit boost with Centrifugal Superchargers, not a mechanical boost limit like a pop off valve.  Therefore, for most Centrifugal Superchargers, enter a very high limit (which is essentially the same as no limit) like 100 PSI. 
Number of S/Cs 
Is the number of superchargers installed.  If you specify 1, the program assumes a supercharger system exactly as specified in this menu.  If you specify Number of S/Cs as 2 and Island CFM of 300, the program assumes the supercharger can actually deliver 600 CFM. 
Note: The program assumes 2 superchargers are installed in parallel. This means that half the air flow goes through each supercharger. 
Intercooler Eff, % 
This combo box lets you pick the effectiveness of the intercooler to cool the intake charge.  An intercooler looks much like a radiator, but instead of cooling engine coolant, it cools the intake air charge.  A supercharger heats up the intake air considerably through the process of compression. Cool air is more dense than warm air.  More cool air can be packed into a given cylinder volume, producing more power.  The intercooler allows ambient air (non-compressed, surrounding air) to cool the charge.  If the intercooler is 100% effective, the intake charge would be brought down to its original (ambient) temperature as specified by Air Temp in the Weather Conditions in the Calculation Conditions menu with no change in boost pressure.  See Table 2.14 in the Roots Supercharger section for definitions of the various ratings. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Turbocharger 
Select Turbocharger if the engine is equipped with a turbocharger which most engine builders are familiar with.  A turbocharger is basically a centrifugal compressor tied to a turbine which is driven by engine exhaust gases. 
Turbocharger Specs have been expanded in later versions with new inputs.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. Enterprise Edition adds even more details.  See Appendix 13. 
1st Stage Turbocharger Specs 
These specs describe the size and efficiency of the turbocharger's compressor and exhaust driven turbine.  The 1st Stage reference means this is the first turbocharger the incoming air is compressed by.  On single stage systems, these are the specs to simulate the only staging of turbocharger. 
The size and performance of the turbocharger's compressor can be obtained from a compressor "map", which are available from the manufacturer.  A typical compressor map is shown in Figure 2.28.  The "island" is the area which gives the maximum efficiency, and is where you want your turbo compressor to operate. The Engine Analyzer Pro will need information about the point where the peak efficiency occurs. 

The turbocharger compressor and turbine sizes determine how soon or at what RPM the turbo will start developing boost. Compressor and turbine sizes are primarily dictated by Island CFM and Turbine Nzzl Dia respectively. A small turbo system will develop boost at a lower RPM, but will become restrictive at higher RPM and higher air flows.  Therefore, small turbos are better choices for street use. Larger turbos are better suited to race engines where RPM is continually high, and flow restrictions must be kept to a minimum. 
Island CFM 
Is the CFM where peak efficiency occurs.  CFM is usually the horizontal "X" scale of a compressor map.  If the air flow is given in pounds per minute, click on Calc to calculate CFM as explained in Section 2.9.21. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
If you do not have a compressor map, estimate Island CFM from your engine's displacement and application as in Table 2.15 or pick one from the Turbocharger Library. 
Table 2.15 Estimate Island CFM 
Engine CID  Application  Island CFM  Number of S/Cs  
less than 50  Street  60  1  
less than 50  Race  100  1  
50 - 100  Street  150  1  
50 - 100  Race  225  1  
100 - 150  Street  200  1  
100 - 150  Race  300  1  
150 - 250  Street  250  1  
150 - 250  Race  400  1  
250 - 400  Street  450  1  
250 - 400  Race  350  2  
400 - 600  Street  350  2  
400 - 600  Race  500  2  

Island Pressure Ratio 
Is the pressure ratio (PR) where peak efficiency occurs.  PR is usually the vertical "Y" scale of a compressor map and is usually in the range from 1.5 to 2.5. 
If you do not have a compressor map, use a PR of 1.8 or pick one from the Turbocharger Library. 
Island Eff, % 
Is the highest thermal efficiency on the compressor map in percent.  The highest efficiency will occur in the center of the island.  Typical values range from 65 to 80%. 
If you do not have a compressor map, use 70% for Island Eff or pick one from the Turbocharger Library. 
Surge CFM 
"Surge" is a phenomena in turbos characterized by unstable, potentially destructive operation.  Surge occurs at high pressure ratios with low air flow.  The surge line defines the point at which surge will start to occur. To tell the program where the surge line is, locate a PR of 2 on the vertical axis.  Move straight across to the surge line, and then drop straight down to the horizontal air flow axis. This air flow is the surge CFM @ PR=2 and defines the surge line to the program.  Also see Figure 2.28. 
If your map is given in lb/hr, click on the Clc button Island CFM to obtain the surge CFM @ PR=2.  If you do not have a  compressor map, use 3/4 of the CFM entered for Island CFM or pick one from the Turbocharger Library. . 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Exh Turbine Eff, % 
Is the exhaust driven turbine's average thermal efficiency.  Seventy percent (70%) is a good estimate for a typical turbo turbine.  For normal turbine designs, 80% is probably the highest possible efficiency.  This can be obtained with a “pulse” turbo which is designed to more efficiently capture the pressure and velocity of the exhaust gasses.  A poor turbo design would have an efficiency of approximately 55%. 
Turbine Nozzle Dia, In 
Is the exhaust turbine's minimum flow area's diameter in inches.  This parameter determines when the compressor will start to produce boost, the smaller the diameter, the earlier the boost.  This parameter allows you to simulate different turbine housings with various A/R ratios. 
Most radial flow turbines have no vanes, and the flow area is the minimum area in the nozzle section as exhaust first enters the turbine.  See Figure 2.29.  Click on the Clc button to calculate the Turbine Nozzle Dia from turbine dimensions or from the Island CFM of the compressor as explained in Section 2.9.22. 

Safety Note:  Although the Engine Analyzer Pro can do a very realistic job of estimating turbocharger performance, DO NOT rely on it alone to safely choose the optimum turbocharger size for a specific engine.  Turbochargers can overspeed (potentially explode from overrevving) or create excessive exhaust temperatures and pressures if sized incorrectly.  Use the Engine Analyzer Pro only for estimating potential performance gains with various approximate turbocharger sizes.  You must follow the turbo manufacturer's recommendations for safe turbo combinations for your application. 
An expanded Calculation Screen was added in v3.9 to allow you to better estimate this critical input.  See Appendix 11 starting on page 261. 
2nd Stage Turbocharger Specs 
The 2nd stage turbocharger specs have not yet been activated in this version of the program. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
General Turbocharger Specs 
Throttle Location 
This combo box lets you pick where the throttle body or carburetor is placed with respect to the compressor.  If the carb or throttle body is before the compressor, pick Draw Through.  If the carb or throttle body is after the compressor, pick Blow Through. The carb or throttle body is less restrictive in the Blow Through position. Throttle Location can have a significant effect on carburetor jet size requirements. 
Note: Both Blow Through and Draw Through setups are common with turbochargers. 

Max Boost Limit, PSI 
If turbocharger conditions are such that it delivers boost greater than this specified level, the Engine Analyzer Pro assumes an exhaust bypass valve or wastegate is activated to limit boost. Wastegates divert exhaust gasses around the turbocharger’s turbine.  This is a very common way to control boost, especially for street applications.  Therefore, set Max Boost Limit to the pressure the wastegate is designed to control boost to. 
# Turbos/Stages 
Is the number of turbochargers installed and if there is one or 2 stages of turbos.  This combo box  lets you pick one of the 4 combinations shown in Figure 2.30.  Note that 2 stage turbocharging has not yet been activated at the printing of this manual. 
Intercooler Eff, % 
This combo box lets you pick the effectiveness of the intercooler to cool the intake charge.  An intercooler looks much like a radiator, but instead of cooling engine coolant, it cools the intake air charge.  A turbocharger heats up the intake air considerably through the process of compression. Cool air is more dense than warm air.  More cool air can be packed into a given cylinder volume, producing more power.  The intercooler allows ambient air (non-compressed, surrounding air) to cool the charge.  If the intercooler is 100% effective, the intake charge would be brought down to its original (ambient) temperature as specified by Air Temp in the Weather Conditions in the Calculation Conditions menu with no change in boost pressure.  See Table 2.14 in the Roots Supercharger section for definitions of the various ratings. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.8 Calculate Performance 
2.8.1 Calculation Conditions 
You can run a test (calculate performance) by: 
• 
Clicking on the Run/HP button at the top of the Main Menu 

• 
Pressing <F2> at the Main Menu 

• 
Clicking on Calc HP(F2) menu item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Menu 

• 
Clicking on Calculate Performance to open up the Calculate Performance Conditions menu, then click on the Calculate Performance button in this menu.  The Calculate Performance Conditions menu will present a menu of conditions and options which describe how you will run or test this engine.  These conditions include: 

• 
Environmental conditions  

• 
Level of nitrous oxide, type of fuel and spark advance 

• 
RPMs to run, and options for the calculations 

• 
Whether or not to "chain" calculations together (make several test runs at once) 




Calculate Performance Conditions have been expanded in later versions with new inputs.  A new Preference in v3.9 allows for Metric outputs.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Test Conditions 
Barometric Pressure, “Hg 
Is the barometric pressure in inches of mercury of the nearest weather station; or at the track or dynamometer room if a barometer instrument is available at these locations. 
If this pressure is in:  Multiply by:  
PSI  2.036  
Bar  29.52  
mm Hg   .03937  
To obtain '' Hg.  
For example: 14 PSI  
 is 14 x 2.036 or  
28.5” Hg.  


Click on the Clc button to review notes concerning the relationship of Barometric Pressure and Elevation.  Also see Elevation, ft and Section 2.9.23. 
Intake Air Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the intake air as it enters the carburetor or throttle body measured in degrees Fahrenheit.  To match dynamometer performance, enter dynamometer room air temperature.  To simulate vehicle performance, enter the temperature of the air entering the air cleaner.  Underhood temperatures can be HOT on warm days (150 degrees or more).  If a hood scoop 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
or some other type of cool air induction is provided, outside (ambient) air temperature is closer to the actual intake air temperature. 
If this temperature is in:        First Multiply by:       Then Add: Degrees R 1 - 460 Degrees C 1.8 32 Degrees K 1.8 - 460 To obtain degrees F.  For example 30 deg C = 30 x 1.8 + 32 =  86 degrees F. 
Version 3.9 has a Preference which allows you to select outputs to be displayed in Metric units.  See Appendix 11, page 261. 
Dew Point, Deg F 
The dew point in degrees F of the air at the track, which describes the air's humidity level.  The Dew Point must be less than Intake Air Temp, deg F.  Dew Point can be calculated from either wet and dry bulb temperatures, or from relative humidity and air temperature readings by clicking on the Clc button.  See Section 2.9.24. 
Dew Point is a less confusing way of describing the air's moisture level than relative humidity.  Relative humidity readings are only meaningful if you also know the air temperature when the reading was made.  However, the air's dew point remains constant even when the air temperature changes.  For example, 40 degree air with a 80 % relative humidity has only a 10% relative humidity when the air is heated to 100 degrees.  However, the dew point remains at 36 degrees for both air temperatures. 
Elevation, ft 
Is the elevation of the race track or dynamometer room above sea level measured in feet.  This value should be available from the local weather station and is used to correct the Barometric Pressure, “Hg specification.  Barometric pressure drops as you go up in elevation.  There are two different ways of entering this specification, depending on how the Barometric Pressure measurement was made: 
Barometric Pressure obtained from radio station, TV station or weather service: “Official sources” usually correct their barometric pressure readings to sea level, meaning their reading is the barometric pressure you would get if you (or your engine) could be at sea level or 0 elevation.  If you have a Barometric Pressure corrected to sea level, you must enter the engine's actual elevation above sea level in feet. 
Barometric Pressure obtained directly from a barometer instrument at the track or dynamometer room.  This reading will usually not be corrected to sea level, but will be the "observed" or actual barometric pressure reading at the same elevation as the engine.  For observed or uncorrected Barometric Pressure, enter an elevation of 0. 
Click on the Clc button to review notes concerning the relationship of Barometric Pressure and Elevation.  Also see Barometric Pressure in this section and Section 2.9.23. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Coolant Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the coolant as it leaves the engine in degrees Fahrenheit.  This value can be estimated as the "start to open" temperature rating of the thermostat.  If the engine is air cooled, enter a value of 190 degrees. 
Accel Rate, RPM/Sec 
For race engines, many dynamometer tests are conducted with the engine accelerating from low speed to high speed at a particular rate. Common rates include 300 and 600 RPM/sec.  Under accelerating conditions, power is absorbed in the engine's and dyno's rotating inertia, and usable power at the engine's flywheel is reduced.  The faster the Accel Rate and the higher the Total Inertia set in the Short Block specs, the more power lost to rotating inertia.  See the Lb x Ft ^2 spec under Engine Inertia / Crank Design in Section 2.2. 
Dynamometer tests for production engines are usually done at "steady state" or "steps", with the dyno holding speed constant while torque is measured at each RPM.  To simulate "steady state" tests, enter 0 for Accel Rate, RPM/Sec.  Then the Total Inertia in the Short Block specs is ignored, and no power is lost to accelerating inertia during the test. 
Notes: 
The Engine Analyzer Pro only calculates power lost to accelerating the rotating inertia.  Other acceleration effects like throttle response, accelerator pump shot, hesitation or bog are not simulated.  
Some dynamometer measurement systems correct for these inertia effects, for example Depac (tm).  For these systems, pick one of the 0 Accel Rates (Steady State or Step Test) even though the test is done with the engine accelerating. 
RPMs to Run 
Starting RPM 
See RPM Step Size below. 
Number of RPM Steps 
See RPM Step Size below. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
RPM Step Size 
These three RPM specifications tell the Engine Analyzer Pro for how many and for which RPMs to calculate the results.  The effect of these specs are displayed in the RPM Preview box shown directly under these specs.  For example: 
 Starting RPM  1000  
Number of RPM Steps   8  
RPM Step Size       400  

This combination will have results calculated for the following RPMs:  1000 1400 1800 2200 2600 3000 3400 3800 Due to space limitations, all RPMs can not be shown on the menu.  The RPM Preview will show this as: RPM Preview:  1000, 1400, 1800, ....3800 
Fuel Specs: 
Fuel Type 
Specifies the type of fuel being burned, either street gasoline, alcohol (methanol) or race  gasoline.  The Engine Analyzer Pro makes the  following assumptions about the difference between these fuels. 
• 
Alcohol is run at 5.0 A/F versus 12.5 for gas.  (This is a change from v1.2 which assumed 4.55 A/F.) 

• 
Alcohol is 13% more dense than gas 

• 
Alcohol produces a 12% increase in products of combustion, where gas only produces a 6% increase 

• 
Alcohol produces 4% more heat per unit of air than gas 

• 
Alcohol at 5.0 has the same burn rate as gas at 12.5 and therefore requires the same spark advance.  (In actual practice, there is conflicting data concerning alcohol's burn rate or required spark advance.  It appears very dependent of A/F mixture quality, A/F distribution, and other factors difficult to simulate.  Therefore, this assumption is made.) 

• 
Drag Racing gas has a lower vapor pressure than gasoline (does not want to atomize as easily) 

• 
Drag Racing gas releases slightly more energy than gasoline. 

• 
Both are assumed to run at 12.5 A/F.  


Obviously many more considerations must be made when building an alcohol engine than what are considered in the Engine Analyzer Pro.  Generally, alcohol has a fuel octane (R+M)/2 of 100.  You must change the octane # when you change fuels. 
The Fuel Specs have been expanded in later versions. See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Fuel Octane (R+M)/2 
Is the octane # rating of the fuel as reported on a service station gas pump.  There are two methods fuel suppliers use to rate the octane number, one is the Research method, the other is the Motor method.  Generally, the Motor method will give an octane rating approximately 4-12 octane #s lower than the Research method.  The octane rating given at the gas pump is the average of 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
the Research and the Motor ratings.  In fact, gas pumps will often display the formula "(R+M)/2" to say their octane rating is the Research octane # plus the Motor octane # divided by 2. 
To estimate Fuel Octane from the Research octane #, simply subtract 4.  To estimate Fuel Octane from the Motor octane #, simply add 4.  For example, if you know the Motor octane is 94, enter a Fuel Octane (R+M)/2 of 94 + 4 = 98 into the Engine Analyzer Pro . 
The Engine Analyzer Pro assumes that as octane increases, vapor pressure decreases.  Vapor pressure is a measure of how easily the gas evaporates or can be atomized.  What this means is that the higher the octane, the more likely you are to have poor A/F Mxtr Qulty in the results, resulting in possibly significant power loss.  This means that for best performance, only use as much octane as you need to eliminate detonation by keeping Knock Index low. 
Tuning Recommendations RPM 
The Engine Analyzer Pro can give recommendations for intake and exhaust runner dimensions and cam profiles based on several very simple tuning principles or rules of thumb. See Appendix 3 and Example 4.5.  These are good starting points, but you should fine tune these specs based on trial and error with the Pro’s calculations.   
Enter the RPM where you want optimum intake and exhaust tuning, or a torque or HP peak.  The Engine Analyzer Pro will list potentially good runner lengths and diameters, and cam durations and lifts at the end of the calculated results.  This value has no affect on the torque and HP test results. 
Nitrous Oxide 

 No Nitrous Oxide 


 With Nitrous Oxide 


Click on the With Nitrous Oxide option and the See Nitrous Specs button becomes enabled.  Click on this button to open up the Nitrous Oxide Specs menu shown to the right.   
These specs describe the amount of nitrous oxide a system can deliver.  Most nitrous systems are rated for the HP increase they can deliver in a properly tuned engine.  The Engine Analyzer Pro makes 3 major simplifying assumptions concerning nitrous oxide injection: 
• 
Jet sizes are proper for correct A/F, and good nitrous and fuel distribution 

• 
Nitrous is injected as a liquid and only a portion vaporizes on the way to the cylinder. There is little displacement of the air which would normally enter the engine under "non-nitrous" conditions. 

• 
Nitrous increases the burn rate, reducing the required spark advance. 


You can not use the Engine Analyzer Pro to design nitrous systems, but only to estimate performance improvements.  Select the No Nitrous Oxide options to simulate an engine without nitrous oxide injection.  The specs in the Nitrous Oxide Specs menu are then ignored. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
As you change specs in this menu, the Nitrous HP graph is constantly being updated to show how the system specified will deliver nitrous.  This graph is the best way to see the effect of various systems, nitrous levels and RPM set points.  Also watch the test results Nitrous, lb/hr and Ntrs Fuel, lb/hr to see the amount of nitrous injected. 
Type of Nitrous System 

 Progressive  2 Stage 


 1 Stage  3 Stage 


Select the type which describes the system you are using.  Various portions of the Nitrous Oxide Specs menu become enabled and disabled depending on your choice here. 
Progressive System Specs 
% of Full HP at Start of Injection 
This is the amount of nitrous delivered (% of the full system HP rating) when the progressive system first start to inject nitrous. 
RPM to Start Nitrous Injection 
This is the engine RPM where the progressive system first start to inject nitrous. 
Full HP Rating of System 
This is the amount of nitrous delivered when the progressive system is delivering its maximum nitrous flow. 
RPM Where System is Full On 
This is the RPM where the progressive system reaches maximum nitrous flow. 
Staged System Specs 
1st Stage HP Rating 
Manufacturer's HP rating of the 1st stage of the nitrous oxide system.  If you are using a 1 stage system, this is the full HP rating of this type of system. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
1st Stage Starting RPM 
RPM where injection from the 1st stage starts. 
2nd Stage Added HP 
Manufacturer's HP rating of the nitrous oxide added by the 2nd stage.  Total nitrous HP is then 1st Stage HP + 2nd Stage HP.   
2nd Stage Starting RPM 
RPM where injection from the 2nd stage starts. 
3rd Stage Added HP 
Manufacturer's HP rating of the nitrous oxide added by the 3rd stage.  Total nitrous HP is then 1st Stage HP + 2nd Stage HP + 3rd Stage HP. 
3rd Stage Starting RPM 
RPM where injection from the 2nd stage starts. 
Spark Curve Specs 

 Program sets spark for best power 


 Use Specified Spark Curve 


Click on the Use Specified Spark Curve option and the See Specs button becomes enabled.  Click on this button to open up the Specified Spark Curve menu shown to the right. 
As you change specs in this menu, the Spark Advance graph is constantly being updated.  This graph is the best way to see the effect of changing spark curve specs. Also watch the test results Spark Advance and Knock Index to see the spark advance at various RPMs and the level of detonation.  If Knock Index is high, greater than 2, specify lower Spark Advance specs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
This Spark Curve Gives Best Performance 
 Yes  These spark curve specs determine the engine’s burn rate. The less the spark advance, the faster the burn rate.  
 No  Other specs in the program determine the   engine’s burn rate  

You choice of these options will have a large impact on engine performance.  Their effect can best be explained by the following examples: 
Example 1 
If at the Calculation Conditions menu you chose the Program sets spark for best power option, the  menu and specs in this section are not available and have no effect on calculated performance.   
Calculation Conditions Menu 

 Program sets spark for best power 


 Use Specified Spark Curve 


Assume that for this engine at this RPM the Engine Analyzer Pro determines the flame requires 50 degrees to completely burn the air/fuel charge to give optimum performance.  This allows 25 degrees for combustion before TDC, 25 degrees for combustion after TDC.  The program will automatically set a Spark Advance timing of 25 degrees BTDC (before top dead center). 
Example 2 
If at the Calculation Conditions menu you chose the Use Specified Spark Curve option, the  menu and specs in this section are available to change and do effect calculated performance. 
Calculation Conditions Menu 

 Program sets spark for best power 


 Use Specified Spark Curve 


This Spark Curve Gives Best Performance 

 Yes 


 No 


Break Point #1, Spark Advance 15 
As in Case 1 the Engine Analyzer Pro determines the flame requires 50 degrees to completely burn the air/fuel charge.  The Engine Analyzer Pro will set 15 degrees spark timing as you specify.  Combustion will be completed at 35 degrees after TDC (15+35=50). The combustion period is retarded 10 degrees from optimum on 25 degrees BTDC.  This should result in a loss of performance, but also reduces the possibility of spark knock (reduce Knock Index and Mx Cyl Pres in the test results). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Example 3 
If at the Calculation Conditions menu you chose the Use Specified Spark Curve option, the  menu and specs in this section are available to change and do effect calculated performance. 
Calculation Conditions Menu 

 Program sets spark for best power 


 Use Specified Spark Curve 


This Spark Curve Gives Best Performance 

 Yes 


 No 


Break Point #1, Spark Advance 15 
In order for 15 degrees of spark advance to be optimum for performance, the total combustion process must only require 30 degrees, 15 degrees before TDC and 15 degrees after TDC.  The Engine Analyzer Pro will set 15 degrees spark timing as you specify and speed up the combustion process so it only requires 30 degrees total.  This should result in an improvement in performance, thermal efficiency and fuel economy.  However cylinder pressure (Mx Cyl Pres, PSI) is likely to increase so the engine will require stronger parts.  (Knock Index could either increase or decrease depending on other factors.) 
Break Point #1, Spark Advance 
Spark advance is this value up to Break Point #1, then it ramps up to the Spark Advance of Break Point #2. 
Break Point #1, RPM 
RPM where Break Point #1 occurs (and spark advance starts to ramp up). 
Break Point #2, Spark Advance 
Spark advance ramps up to this value at Break Point #2 and remains here as RPM increases. 
Break Point #2, RPM 
RPM where Break Point #2 occurs (where engine reaches maximum spark advance). 
The Spark Table Specs have been expanded in later versions with up to 6 levels of Break Points.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

Chain Calculations 
Do Chain Calculations 

 No 


 Yes 


Click on the Yes option and the See Chain Calculation Specs button becomes enabled.  Click on this button to open up the Chain Calculation specs menu shown to the right. 
The Chain Calculation option allow you to make up to 36 consecutive tests or performance calculations without having to be at the computer 
lobe separation and cam timing.  This can be done by trying several intake and exhaust lobe centerlines, for example: 
Intake Lobe Centerline 100, 104,108, 112, 116, 120 Exhaust Lobe Centerline 100, 104,108, 112, 116, 120 
The settings in Chain Calculation menu of  Figure 2.34 are set to do this particular Chain Calculation.  You will end up with 36 tests, every possible combination of these settings, when the test is complete.   
Important:  Because of the large amount of data which can be produced with Chain Calculations, there is a limitation.  Only torque and HP data is saved for each calculation.  No other RPM data and no cycle data is saved, reported or graphed. 
The Chain Calculation Specs have been greatly expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
# Specs to Chain 
 1  2 
Select 1 if you want only 1 engine spec to be chained, 2 if you want 2 specs to be changed.  In the example above, if you selected 1, the Chain Spec #2 items would have been dimmed.  The results would have only consisted of 6 tests of the different Intake Centerlines.  The Exhaust Centerline would have stayed at whatever value was currently entered in the Cam/Valve Train Specs menu. 
Chain Spec #1 
Spec Type and Name 
Click on arrow for a list of possible specs for the first chain calculation.  Not all engine specs can be chained.  Also see Chain Step Size below. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Starting Spec Value 
The value of the first chain calculation for Chain Spec #1. Also see Chain Step Size below. 
# Chain Steps 
The number of settings for Chain Calculation #1, 2-6. Also see Chain Step Size below. 
Chain Step Size 
The amount of increase in Chain Spec #1 between successive chain calculations.   
Based on the settings of these specs, the program will show you a preview of the settings which will be tested in the Chain Calculation. If you have chosen an unusual set of specs, say cylinder Bore: 220, 230, 240, ...270 (which is outside the program’s limits for bore sizes) the program will warn you when you leave this menu.  You must then either correct these specs to make sense or click on Turn Off Chain Calcs. 
Current Value 
Displays the current setting of the spec you are going to chain, and is simply a handy reminder. 
Chain Spec #2 
Spec Type and Name Starting Spec Value # Chain Steps Chain Step Size 
These specs are the same as those described for Chain Spec #1 above.  These are not available if you have chosen 1 as the # Specs to Chain. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.2 Test Results from Calculated Performance 
The Engine Analyzer Pro’s calculated output consists primarily of 3 types: 
• 
RPM Data. This is data which changes for each RPM tested, like torque, HP, fuel flow, etc. 

• 
Special Calculations.  This is data which does not change with RPM, like cubic inch displacement, dynamic compression ratio, etc. 

• 
Cycle Data. This is data which changes within an RPM, for each different crank angle of the engine, like piston position, cylinder pressure, etc. 


RPM Data and Special Calculations are shown in  Figure 2.35.  Cycle data is only available for graphing, for display with the See-Engine feature, or for exporting as an ASCII file.  Several other features are available from this screen (Figure 2.35) which are also discussed in this section. 
A new Preference in v3.9 allows for you to select various data types to be displayed in Metric units.  See Appendix 11 on page 261 for more updated info. 
Figure 2.35 Major Features of Output Screen Showing Test Results 
Menu bar with output options: Back to Main Menu, Make Graphs, Print Results, Display Help, Save or Open Files of Test Results, Analyze results (program gives advice based on user requirements and current results), See Engine piston/valves/valve dynamics/air flows, etc. 
Command buttons: Make Graphs, Print Results, Display or Edit Engine and Component Comments, Display Notes (safety issues, possible problems, etc.) about current test results 
Summary of Notes (safety issues, possible problems, etc.) 


Name of current Engine File 
Name of current Test File 
Performance Summary 

RPM Data. Click on any cell if the grid for a Help definition of that particular piece of data. 
Slide bar. Click and drag button to display all RPM test results. 


Special Calculations. Results which do not change with RPM. Click on any result for a Help definition of that particular piece of data. 
Slide bar. Click and drag button to display all Special Calculation test results. 
Horizontal slide bar. Click and drag to display all RPM Data if # RPMs is greater than 15. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
RPM Data 
RPM Data looks much like a dynamometer data sheet which gives projected engine test results for each RPM tested. 
Engine RPM 
Is the engine crankshaft’s rotational speed in revolutions per minute. 
Brk Tq, ft-lbs 
Is the brake torque produced by the engine measured in ft. lbs.  Brake torque is the usable net torque at the engine's flywheel.  See Appendix 2.  This is the same as the torque numbers you see in advertisements and in dynamometer torque and HP curves. 
Brake HP 
Is the Brake HP produced by the engine measured in horsepower.  Brake HP is the usable net HP at the engine's flywheel.  See Appendix 2.  This is the same as the HP numbers you see in advertisements and in dynamometer torque and HP curves.  To calculate torque from HP or HP from torque, use the following formulas: 
Torque = HP x 5252  HP = Torque x RPM 
 RPM  5252  
Exh Pres, PSI  

Is the average exhaust pressure after the exhaust port and exhaust manifold/header, but before the exhaust system (if any), measured in PSI.  (In version 1.2 this was given in inches of mercury.)  
Int Vac, “Hg Boost, PSI 
Is the average intake vacuum or supercharger boost after the carburetor or throttle body (and supercharger/turbocharger if any) but before the intake manifold runners measured in "Hg during the intake stroke.  If the engine is supercharged or turbocharged, the units are given in PSI boost. 
Vol Eff% 
Is the volumetric efficiency of the engine measured in %.  The volumetric efficiency is the percent of air which actually enters and remains in the cylinder during each intake stroke, compared to the amount which could under perfect, unsupercharged conditions. The amount of air which can enter the cylinder under perfect conditions is the swept volume of the cylinder with air at the actual barometric pressure (Barometric Pressure and Elevation effects combined) and Intake Air Temp, deg F.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
For example, if the swept volume is 50 cu in, the air density at the specific barometer and intake air temperature is .000044 lb/cu in, .0022 lbs (50 cu in x .000044 lb/cu in) is the amount of air which can enter the cylinder under perfect conditions.  If only .0018 lbs actually enters the cylinder during the intake stroke, the volumetric efficiency is:
 Vol Eff% = .0018 x 100% = 82 % .0022 
During supercharging, if the engine ingests .0030 lbs each intake stroke, the volumetric efficiency is calculated as: 
Vol Eff% = .0030 x 100% = 136 % .0022 
If .0030 lbs enters the cylinder, but .0003 lbs goes straight through and ends up out the exhaust (called "short circuiting"), the Vol Eff% is: 
Vol Eff% = (.0030 - .0003) x 100% = 123 % .0022 
See Shrt Circuit, %. 
Actual CFM 
Is the flow rate of fresh air into the engine measured in cubic feet per minute (CFM).  This is measured at the entrance of the air cleaner or if no air cleaner is present, the carburetor(s) or throttle body(s).  Since this is called "actual", it is not corrected to standard conditions as in earlier Engine Analyzer programs.  Actual CFM should correlate more closely to actual dynamometer air flow measurements. 
Fuel Flow, lb/hr 
Is the fuel flow delivered by the carburetor(s) or fuel injectors in lbs/hr for either gas or alcohol.  This does not include the fuel to combust nitrous oxide, which is assumed to come from a separate fuel delivery system and is identified as Ntrs Fuel in the test results. 
For Gasoline, the fuel is assumed to be similar to octane (an expensive type of gasoline with an octane # of 100) in density (5.86 lb/gal), heating value (19,000 BTU/lb), and stoichiometric A/F (14.7).  Drag Racing Gas is assumed the same except with a slightly higher BTU content.  Gasoline fuel flows are calculated based on an optimum power A/F (air/fuel ratio) of 12.5:1.  (Other differences between Gasoline and Drag Racing Gas are discussed in the A/F Mxtr Qlty output discussed later in this section.) 
If your particular engine runs at 11.5:1 A/F, your engine burns 12.5/11.5, or 1.09 times as much fuel per unit of air as the Engine Analyzer Pro calculates. Multiply the Engine Analyzer Pros fuel flow by 1.09 to get fuel flows for an engine running at 11.5:1.   To calculate fuel flows in gallons per hour (GPH), multiply lbs/hr by .171 (.171=1/5.86). 
        For example, the Engine Analyzer Pro calculates 145 lbs/hr fuel flow at peak HP, assuming 12.5:1 A/F. 
            Your engine runs at 12:1, instead of 12.5:1 A/F:
 145 lbs/hr x 12.5 = 151 lbs/hr 12 
            You need the flow in GPH to size a fuel pump: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
151 lbs/hr x .171 = 25.8 GPH 
For alcohol, the fuel is assumed to be methanol with a density  of 6.6 lb/gal and heating value of 8,600 BTU/lb.  Fuel flows are calculated based on an A/F of 5.0:1. To calculate fuel flows in gallons per hour (GPH), multiply lbs/hr of alcohol by .152 .  
Nitrous, lb/hr 
Is the flow of nitrous oxide liquid in lbs/hr.  This has been increased (more nitrous flow is required to produce a certain amount of HP) from what was used in version 1.2. 
Ntrs Fuel, lb/hr 
Is the fuel flow required for the nitrous oxide injected in lbs/hr for either gas or alcohol.  The program assumes that this fuel is injected through a system separate from the carburetor or electronic fuel injectors.  The total fuel burned by the engine is Fuel Flow + Ntrs Fuel. This has been increased (more fuel is required for a certain nitrous flow, or it is given a richer mixture) from what was used in version 1.2. 
BMEP, PSI 
Is Brake Mean Effective Pressure. in PSI which produced the work on the piston that actually made it to the flywheel.  Mathematically it is calculated as: 
BMEP = IMEP - FMEP 
Like IMEP and FMEP, BMEP is a convenient way to compare power output for 2 very differently sized engines.  If 50 cc motorcycle engine and a 500 CID Pro Stock engine are equally well designed, they should both put out similar BMEP levels, even if the Pro Stock motor makes 100 times more power. 
A/F Mxtr Qlty, % 
Is the A/F Mixture Quality rated in %, where 100 % means there is no power loss from poor A/F Mixture Quality.  A/F Mixture Quality is the combined result of these separate effects: 
• 
A/F Maldistribution where all cylinders do not get the same air and fuel.  Some cylinders run leaner than optimum and some run richer. 

• 
Fuel Metering where the fuel metering signal strength to the carb is less than required to atomize the fuel, or worse, not even pull fuel through the jets at all. 

• 
Atomization of fuel in the chamber, which depends on many design variables and fuel properties.  The Pro assumes that the higher the Octane rating of the fuel, the lower the Reid Vapor pressure and the less likely the fuel is to atomize.  Obviously not all fuels have the same vapor pressure for a certain octane, so this trend is not necessarily true for all fuels.  Alcohol is also assumed to be slightly more difficult to produce good A/F Mixture Quality, because of its large cooling effect. 


The lower the A/F Mixture Quality, the lower the power output the Pro will project.  Therefore,  pay special attention to this number.  This is a change from all other pervious Engine Analyzer  programs, which always assumed perfect A/F distribution and atomization. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
BSFC, lb/HP-hr 
Is the brake specific fuel consumption of the engine in lbs/HP-hr, or pounds of fuel per hour per horsepower.  BSFC is a measure of how efficiently the fuel is being used to produce power at the crankshaft.  A good BSFC is in the range of .40-.45 for gas and .95-1.10 for alcohol, near the torque peak RPM.  The lower the BSFC, the more efficient the engine is at converting fuel into HP. 
BSFC is based on total engine fuel flow, or Fuel Flow + Ntrs Fuel. 
Thermal Eff, % 
Is the thermal efficiency as defined in Appendix 2, expressed in %. 
IMEP, PSI 
Is the Indicated Mean Effective Pressure in PSI which produced the work on the piston.  In simple terms, the IMEP is the average cylinder pressure during the expansion stroke which would have produced this amount of torque. 
IMEP is a way of rating the indicated torque output of any size engine.  For example, a 400 cubic inch engine which produces 450 ft lbs of indicated torque produces 170 PSI IMEP.  A 40 cubic inch engine which produces only 50 ft lbs produces 189 PSI IMEP.  Although the 40 cubic inch engine produces a only one ninth the torque, its higher IMEP shows that it is a more efficient design for producing torque. 
"Leading edge" race engines produce from 280 to 300 PSI IMEP naturally aspirated (unsupercharged).  You can use IMEP as a rating of your engine's potential.  If the program predicts only 200 PSI IMEP, you have lots of unused potential for more power.  It the program is predicting 350 PSI IMEP without supercharging, the program is predicting more power than is likely with current technology.  
Frctn Tq, ft-lbs 
Is the engine's friction torque in foot pounds.  See Frctn HP. 
Frctn HP 
Is the engine's friction horsepower.  This is the HP required to overcome all the rubbing, mechanical friction of the internal moving parts (bearings, rings, etc), oil pump, water pump and to drive any accessories.  This does not include the HP to drive a belt driven supercharger.  This is listed separately at the end of the Projected Performance report as Compressor HP. 
Note:  The friction calculated here is not the same as the friction measured during a dynamometer test where the engine is motored over by the dynamometer.  See Motoring HP. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
FMEP, PSI 
Would be the average pressure on the piston (or amount of IMEP) required just to overcome the rubbing, mechanical friction of the engine which produces Frctn HP.  Like IMEP and BMEP, FMEP is a method of rating the friction performance of engines of different sizes.  For example, most engines will have an FMEP of 30 PSI at an engine RPM which gives an average piston speed of 2300 ft/min. 
Piston Speed = 2 x Stroke (inches) x RPM 12 
Note:  Checking to see if the Engine Analyzer Pro is calculating between 22-38 PSI of FMEP with a piston speed of 2300 ft/min is a good check of your Short Block specs.  If the Engine Analyzer Pro friction is out of this range at approximately 2300 ft/min piston speed, check and possibly adjust the specifications which affect engine friction. 
Mech Eff, % 
Is the mechanical efficiency as defined in Appendix 2, expressed in %.  Mech Eff includes the effect of Compressor HP from any belt driven superchargers.  
Motoring HP 
Is the HP required to motor the engine with a dynamometer.  Motoring tests are conducted with electric dynamometers (where the dynamometer is driving the non-firing engine) to measure the engine's friction.  Motoring HP includes all rubbing friction as indicated by Frctn HP, Pumping Work and Compressor HP horsepower. 
Pumpng Work, HP 
Is the work done by the piston to pull the fresh charge into the cylinder and push the exhaust charge out, calculated in horsepower. This is work the engine must do to run (like turning the oil pump) and therefore reduces the brake power of the engine.  For that reason, it is expressed as a negative number.   
If the engine is equipped with a supercharger, the Pumpng Work may be positive.  In this case, the pressure in the intake manifold actually pushes the air into the cylinder and pushes the piston down on the intake stroke, making positive work and thus adding a small amount to the brake power at the crankshaft.  However, the power to do this positive work, came from the Compressor HP used to drive the supercharger.   
Note:  The pumping work calculated here is not technically the work of the pumping loop.  Technically, it is the PV loop from work done from BDC exhaust to BDC at start of compression. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Residual Exh, % 
Is the fraction of the total charge in the cylinder after the intake valve(s) has closed which is left over (residual) exhaust from the previous power cycle.  The residual exhaust is expressed as a mass fraction, not a volume fraction. Therefore, since the residual is hot, "left over" exhaust which is less dense than the cool fresh air/fuel charge; the volume fraction of residual is higher than the mass fraction.   
For example, a 5% mass fraction of residual may mean a 10% volume fraction.  This means 10% of the cylinder's volume is filled with left over exhaust, volume which can not be used to draw in fresh air/fuel charge, effectively reducing the volumetric efficiency 10% and power 10%.   
To maximize power, you will want to reduce the Residual Exh %.  In fact the Residual Exh can be negative, which indicates no exhaust from the previous cycle is left in the cylinder, but that some fresh air/fuel charge actually passed through the cylinder, out the exhaust during the overlap period without being burned.  This condition is called "short circuiting" and is wasteful, giving poor fuel economy and emissions, but will maximize power output.  See Vol Eff, % and Shrt Circuit, %. 
Shrt Circuit, % 
Is the percent of the fresh mass which "short circuits", or passes directly through the chamber and out the exhaust during overlap without being burned. 
Exh Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the exhaust gas in degrees Fahrenheit immediately after leaving the cylinder, in the exhaust port. The exhaust gasses are cooled considerably by contact with the exhaust port and the exhaust manifold or header.  Therefore, exhaust temperatures measured downstream of the exhaust valve will likely be cooler than those calculated by the Engine Analyzer Pro, especially at lower RPMs. 
However, in the actual engines some of the fuel may not burn completely in the cylinder but continues to burn in the exhaust port and manifold/header.  In these cases, some engine's may exhibit higher exhaust temperatures than those calculated by the Engine Analyzer Pro, especially at retarded spark advance. 
Mx Cyl Pres, PSI 
Is the maximum pressure which occurs in the cylinder during combustion in PSI absolute. 
Mx Cyl Tmp, deg F 
Is the maximum temperature which occurs in the cylinder during combustion in degrees F. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
In Port Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the fresh charge as it enters the cylinder/chamber in degrees F.  In this version, the program is including some fuel and nitrous evaporation effects which can cool the charge considerably.  This was not considered in version 1.2.   Depending on the type of intake manifold, air temperature and engine coolant temperature, the fresh charge picks up considerable heat along the intake runner and port/valve.  This rise of temperature hurts volumetric efficiency and power and is indicated by In Port Temp. 
Piston Spd, ft/min 
Is the average speed of the piston in feet per minute.  Piston speed is a useful way to rate the RPM induced stress level of the reciprocating components of engines of very different sizes.  For example, engines with typical production parts can usually rev up to a piston speed on 2750 ft/min without overly stressing pistons, connecting rods, etc.   
The equation for piston speed is:
 Piston Speed = 2 x Stroke (inches) x RPM 12 
You can see that Piston Speed only depends on RPM and Stroke.  An engine with a 4” stroke  will reach 2750 ft/min at 4125 RPM, but an engine with only a 3 inch stroke can rev to 5500 before it reaches 2750 ft/min.  Both of these engines will be putting approximately the same stress on the rods and pistons at these quite different RPMs.  This is the reason 100 cc racing motorcycle engines can rev to 25000 RPM but 500 CID Pro Stock motors can only rev to 9000 RPM.  See also Piston Gs @ TDC. 
Piston Gs @ TDC 
Is the piston acceleration in Gs where the piston changes direction at TDC. TDC is generally where the highest piston Gs occur. Internal stresses of many reciprocating components are directly related to piston Gs.  For example, if piston Gs increase 25%, you need parts which are 25% stronger. Consult the manufacturer of your rotating and reciprocating components to determine their maximum G load ratings for various applications.  See also Piston Spd, ft/min. 
Coolant HP 
Is an estimate of the total heat rejected to the coolant that the radiator must deal with.  This includes the heat energy which is lost to the coolant through the cylinder walls, combustion chamber walls and through the top of the piston plus the energy lost through the exhaust ports and from the friction heat generated from the internal moving parts expressed in horsepower.  (Including the heat from the exhaust port and friction is a change from version 1.2.  This should make the program more useful for users trying to design cooling systems.)  To convert HP to BTU/hr, multiply by 2545.  For example: 
Coolant HP = 45 HP = 45 HP x 2545 BTU/hr = 114525 BTU/hr HP 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Blow By, CFM 
Is the amount of combustion gasses leaking past the rings, measured in CFM. The leakage area by the rings is defined by Cyl Leakage spec in the Short Block specs.  This value should correlate with blow-by measured during dyno testing.  Blow-by can be measured by: 
• 
Disabling the PCV system (if any). 

• 
Sealing the crankcase except for 1 exit. 

• 
Running the engine at full power and measure all blow-by escaping from the 1 exit. 


In Tune Prs, PSI 
Is the average dynamic intake pressure from inertia tuning occurring at the critical period close to the intake closing event in 'PSI. Use this value to quickly see the strength of the intake tuning pulses.  See Section 3.4 for graphing the cycle data Int Prs which is the instantaneous pressure upon which In Tune Prs is based.  Also see Example 4.5. 
Avg In Vel, ft/sec 
Is the calculated (not actual) average velocity of the fresh charge in the intake runner in feet/second.  This is a simplistic value, calculated by: 
Runner Velocity = Piston Velocity x Piston AreaIntake Runner Area 
The actual velocity depends on volumetric efficiency, cam timing, intake pressure and temperature, etc.  However, several "rules of thumb" have been developed about sizing runners based on calculated runner velocity.  Most state that you should design the runner area for a calculated velocity of 250-350 feet/second for optimum intake tuning. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro does not use these "rules of thumb" concerning Avg In Vel in its performance projections.  It is reported only for information. For example, if Avg In Vel is only 150 at the RPM you want good tuning (like your desired torque peak RPM), you may have to specify a smaller diameter intake runner and/or port diameter(s) for good performance.  Likewise, if the program calculates 500 for Avg In Vel at your desired HP peak RPM (where you still want good tuning), the current intake runner and/or port diameter(s) may be too small. 
Avg Ex Vel, ft/sec 
Is similar to the preceding Avg In Vel.  On the exhaust side, approximately 300 feet/second has been determined a good "target" for sizing header pipe diameters for optimum tuning.  On the exhaust side, actual velocities are 2 to 3 times that calculated by Avg Ex Vel because of the high exhaust temperatures. 
Mach # 
The 1979 SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) paper "An Analysis of the Volumetric Efficiency Characteristics of 4-Stroke Cycle Engines Using the Mean Inlet Mach Number, Mim", 790484, by Fukutani and Watanabe is the basis of this calculation.  It 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
was an extension of the Mach Index characteristic first identified in the 1940s by C.F. Taylor and co-workers from MIT, "The Internal Combustion Engine In Theory and Practice", C.F. Taylor, 1985, MIT Press.   
These papers state that an engine's air flow potential per cycle (volumetric efficiency) depends on its average intake flow coefficient, intake valve flow area, cylinder size, speed of sound in air and RPM.  These five terms are combined into one value called the Mach Index, called Mach # by the Engine Analyzer Pro.  In simple terms Mach # relates the average velocity of the intake charge past the valve to the speed of sound.  The speed of sound is theoretically the maximum velocity possible past the valve, which would give a Mach # of 1.0.  A Mach # of .4 states the average velocity is only 40% of the maximum possible velocity. 
Taylor's work showed good correlation between volumetric efficiency and Mach # for several engines with conservative cam timing.  The correlation showed that volumetric efficiency (and therefore power) would start to drop sharply when Mach # increased above approximately .55.  However, more recent studies show poor correlation if intake cam duration increases significantly.  The 1979 paper includes a correction for intake duration; the higher the intake duration, the lower the Mach #, and the higher the RPM for peak volumetric efficiency. 
General "rules of thumb" concerning the Mach # include: 
• 
Peak volumetric efficiency should occur in the range of .3 to .5 Mach # with no tuning effects 

• 
Volumetric efficiency drops rapidly in the range of .6 - .8 Mach # 


The Mach # is calculated based on the static intake valve flow area, not dynamic flow area which can be different due to valve train bending or tossing.  See Act In FlowArea,%.  The Engine Analyzer Pro does not use Mach # in its calculations, but reports it only for information. 
Act In FlowArea,% 
Is the dynamic valve flow area compared to static valve flow area in percent. If the valve train had no bending and no tossing (like turning Valve Train Dynamics Off) this value will be 100%.  Generally the dynamic valve flow area will be less than the static area due to bending, giving Act In FlowArea values of 93 - 98.  This means the valve is allowing only 93-98 % as much flow potential as the cam is telling it.  If you encounter valve toss, Act In FlowArea may be 101% or more, saying the valve is allowing more flow potential than the cam is telling it to allow. 
Note:  This is not the same as dynamic lobe area vs actual lobe area.  During valve toss, the valve may be lifted much more than dictated by the cam lobe. However, if the extra lift occurs at high lift, you may get no increase in flow area.  That's because high lift flow area is limited by the port's throat area, not valve lift.  See Figure 2.9. 
Act Ex FlowArea,% 
See Act In FlowArea,% above. 
Valve Toss 
Indicates that dynamic valve motion has significantly higher lift than the theoretical valve motion (i.e. the follower has separated significantly from the camshaft).  Valve Toss is not a definite condition that can be accurately predicted.  Valve Toss here simply means that there is a high likelihood the valve spring can not hold the valve train and follower in contact with the cam. Valve Toss will be listed as None, Int, Exh or In&Ex to indicate if valve toss is likely to occur and on which valve.  If Valve Train Dynamics are turned Off in the Cam/Valve Train menu, this output will be blank unless hydraulic lifter pump up has occurred.  Then it will be marked PmpUp, but there is no indication if the pump up occurred on the intake, exhaust or both. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Valve toss depends strongly on the specific cam profile.  The Engine Analyzer Pro's standard lobe profiles are a compromise, which may likely not exactly simulate your particular cam profile.  For improved accuracy simulating valve train dynamics, use a detailed cam profile file like a Cam Dr file. 
With mechanical (solid) followers, the actual engine's power may increase when valve toss conditions are reached.  That is because the valves are being opened higher and longer than dictated by the cam. This is shown when Act In FlowArea and Act Ex FlowArea increases.  Power may also drop off due to valve bounce.  Valve bounce is when the valve is not gently returned to the valve seat by the cam’s closing ramp, but is allowed to slam into it.  The force of the valve slamming into the valve seat may cause it to bounce off the seat at a critically bad time, causing a loss of  cylinder pressure and power. With hydraulic lifters the actual engine's power is almost always likely to fall off sharply when valve toss conditions are reached.  That is due to lifter "pump up" holding the valves off their seats, allowing cylinder leakage.  The Engine Analyzer Pro simulates this power loss both with solid and mechanical lifters with Valve Train Dynamics turned On.  With Valve Train Dynamics turned Off, this power loss is only simulated for an estimated typical valve train with hydraulic lifters. 
Knock Index 
Indicates the likelihood that the engine will detonate, spark knock, or "ping" at this RPM with these conditions.  Use Table 2.15 to interpret the Knock Index. 
Table 2.15 Knock Index Definitions 
Knock Index  Definition  
Greater than 2  Detonation is very likely. The higher the Knock Index value is above 2, the more likely severe engine damage will result, i.e. holes in pistons, etc.  
1.0-2.0  Detonation may or may not occur, depending on factors difficult to model.  
Less than 1  Detonation is unlikely.  

Safety Note:  Preignition is the process where a glowing hot spot in the chamber starts the combustion process before the spark plug ignites it.  This is a completely different phenomena than detonation.  Preignition is possibly more damaging to an engine than knock, and is NOT predicted by the Engine Analyzer Pro. 
Spark Advnc, deg 
Is the spark advance timing in degrees before top dead center (BTDC).  See the spark parameters menu in the Calculation Conditions, Section 2.8.1. 
Note:  The spark advance calculated by the Engine Analyzer Pro for optimum performance is only an approximation based on limited information about the engine.  Therefore, your particular engine may require several degrees more or less spark advance than given by Spark Advnc in the results. 
Primary Jet 
The recommended diameter of the primary main jet in inches or Holley jet #, depending on your choices in the Preferences menu at the Main Menu.  This size should deliver the Pro’s assumed optimum power A/F of 12.5 for gasoline or 5.0 for alcohol.  This calculation is based on numerous carburetor assumptions and simplifications.  See fuel delivery specs in Section 2.4, Intake System.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
The goal of most carburetor systems is to deliver the same A/F at all RPMs. This would be the case if the recommended Primary Jet reported here was exactly the same at all RPMs.  By adjusting the various carburetor specs under Intake System specs, you can see how this goal can be reached. 
Primary Jet is not reported if the Intake System Manifold Type is fuel injected.   
WARNING: Although recommended jet sizes may work well in some cases, do not use them to jet your carb.  Due to the many carb assumptions made by the Pro, recommended jet sizes should only be used to show trends. 
Secondary Jet 
The recommended diameter of the secondary main jet in inches or Holley Jet #.  See the preceding Primary Jet explanation.  Secondary Jet is not reported if the Intake System Manifold Type is fuel injected. 
WARNING: Although recommended jet sizes may work well in some cases, do not use them to jet your carb.  Due to the many carb assumptions made by the Pro, recommended jet sizes should only be used to show trends. 
Injctr Dty Cyc, % 
The recommended duty cycle in percent to deliver optimum power A/F for this RPM.  Duty cycle is a way of saying what % of the time is the injector open.  If this value is greater than 100%, it means the engine requires more fuel than these injectors can provide, even if they were open "full time".  To provide enough fuel flow, you would have to increase the injector flow rating or fuel pressure. The Engine Analyzer Pro assumes a .8 millisecond "lag" for opening or closing the injector.  The lag of your injectors and EFI system may be quite different. 
Injctr Dty Cyc is not reported if the Intake System Manifold Type is as carbureted. 
Inj Plse Wdth, ms 
The recommended pulse width in milliseconds to deliver optimum power A/F for this RPM.  For example, if Inj Plse Wdth is 24.5, it is saying the injector should be open 24.5 milliseconds (.0245 seconds) every time it fires.  Also see the preceding Injctr, Dty Cyc explanation. 
Inj Plse Wdth is not reported if the Intake System Manifold Type is carbureted. 
Calc Error 
Occasionally the Pro can not obtain an assumed and final volumetric efficiency which agree within the accepted tolerance.  The program then uses the average of the assumed and final volumetric efficiency for the final volumetric efficiency.  Calc Error is set to the % difference between this average volumetric efficiency and final volumetric efficiency calculated.   
To summarize, if Calc Error is 0, the Pro found an assumed and final volumetric efficiency within acceptable limits, and the Pro’s test results for this RPM are accurate. If Calc Error is not 0, it represents the % difference (or error) between the volumetric efficiency reported and the actual volumetric efficiency calculated at this RPM. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Supercharger Outputs: 
If calculations are made for supercharged or turbocharged  engines, additional calculations are made and reported at the bottom of the Projected Performance report.  If the engine is not supercharged or turbocharged, these outputs are left blank. 
Compressor Eff, % 
The thermal efficiency of the supercharger or turbocharger compressor. 
Cmprssr Pres Ratio 
The pressure ratio produced by the supercharger or turbocharger compressor. For example, if the absolute pressure before the compressor is 14.7 PSI (standard barometric pressure) and the PR is 2.0, the absolute pressure after the compressor is 14.7 x 2.0 = 29.4 PSI. The boost pressure alone would be 29.4 - 14.7 = 14.7 PSI. 
Compressor HP 
The engine HP required to run the supercharger's or turbocharger's compressor calculated in HP.  If the engine has a belt driven supercharger, this is the power which must be transmitted through the belt (useful for belt sizing). For belt driven superchargers, this HP is also added into the Motoring HP and Mech Eff data reported by the program. 
Compressor RPM 
The RPM of the belt driven Roots or Centrifugal supercharger's compressor rotor or impeller. 
Roots Vol Eff, % 
The volumetric efficiency of the Roots compressor.  For example, if the Volume/Rev is 200 but the compressor is only flowing 150 cubic inches of fresh air per revolution, Roots Vol Eff would be 150/200 or 75%. 
Turbo Wastegt, % 
Signals that the turbocharger's waste gate is opening to control boost to the preset maximum level.  If Turbo Wastegt is 0, the wastegate is closed and all exhaust is passing through the turbine.  If not zero, Turbo Wastegt reports the percent of exhaust bypassed around the turbine to limit boost on the intake side. 
Turbo Surge, % 
Signals that the turbocharger compressor is operating near or completely within the surge range.  Surge is a condition where air flow through the turbo compressor is much less than optimum.  It is expressed as a percent of the surge CFM flow at the particular pressure ratio (PR) the turbo is currently operating.  For example, if the surge line at PR=1.6 is at 200 CFM and the turbo is operating at PR=1.6 at 150 CFM, Turbo Surge would be reported as (200-150)/200 or 25%.  Therefore, the higher the Turbo Surge value, the farther into the surge region. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Special Calculations 
The Special Calculation Specs have been expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Valve Flow & Cam Calculations 
Figure 2.36 Overlap Area 
Overlap Area, deg*sq-in 
This is the overlap flow area in units of degree-square inches.  These units can be illustrated using the example below.   
Example: If the Overlap Area was 4, it could mean that: 
• 
A valve area of four square inches was open for one degree of crank rotation. 

• 
A valve area of one square inch was open for four degrees of crank rotation. 

• 
A valve area of .4 square inches was open for 10 degrees of crank rotation. 

• 
Or any other combination which when multiplied together gives 4. 


The phrase "valve area of X square inches was open" means that a perfectly flowing hole measuring X square inches was present between the exhaust and intake port for 1 crank degree.  ("Perfectly flowing" means a flow coefficient of 1.0.) 
At idle conditions on a street engine, this is when intake vacuum can pull residual exhaust into the intake manifold.  The higher the Overlap Area, the higher the idle speed and the lower the idle vacuum.   
Note:  A larger cylinder can tolerate more Overlap Area.  A 500 CID V-8 may idle at 1000 RPM with a given overlap area, but a 250 CID V-8 with the same overlap area could idle at 2200. 
For race engines, overlap is generally needed for two reasons.  First, it provides lower cam acceleration rates to attain the high lifts required for high RPM HP.  Second, overlap can also improve performance by allowing for efficient purging of residual exhaust out of the clearance volume during overlap with proper intake and exhaust tuning.  However, at "untuned" RPMs, overlap can increase the potential for intake reversion (reverse air flow up the intake runner from the cylinder) and poor scavenging. High overlap area can also lead to poor fuel economy through "short circuiting" (where intake charge passes through the combustion chamber out the exhaust system without being used).   
Since turbocharged engines operate with high pressure and high temperature exhaust, Overlap Area is best kept to a minimum for turbocharged engines.  This is both to reduce reversion (when high pressure exhaust flows backward into the intake) and exhaust temperatures (when "short circuited" fresh charges burns in the exhaust). 
The Overlap Area is given here to compare overlap areas between different cam profiles, lash settings, and cylinder head flow potential.  Check Idle Vacuum, “Hg in this section also to see how Overlap Area effects an important aspect of street engine performance. 
Vlv Area, deg*sq-in 
Is the valve opening flow area in units of degree-square inches, similar units to Overlap Area, deg*sq-in.  This value represents the total effective flow area available for the intake or exhaust valves while they are open, not just when both are open. It is 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

calculated from the valve lift curve and the valve flow curve.  See Figure 2.37.  Unlike flow coefficients, this value does increase directly as valve duration and valve size increases.  It is these areas upon which Total Exh/Int, % is based. 
The Vlv Area is given here to compare valve opening areas between different cam profiles, lash settings, valve sizes and flow coefficients. Also like Overlap Area, deg*sq-in, larger cylinders will require larger valve areas for similar volumetric efficiency. 
Total Exh/Int % 
This is the percentage ratio of total exhaust flow area to intake flow area. It is calculated as: 
Total Exh/Int % = Exhaust Vlv Area, deg*sq-inx 100% Intake Vlv Area, deg*sq-in 
"Rules of thumb" state that the exhaust port does not produce significant power losses until the exhaust flow potential falls below 75% of the intake flow potential.  For supercharged or nitrous oxide engines this percent should increase to approximately 85%. 
Total Avg Flow Coef 
This is the average flow coefficient for the port, valve and runner for the time the valve is open.  It shows how well the port flows compared to a "perfectly" designed port with a "perfect" cam profile.  A perfect profile is defined as one where the valve opens immediately to a lift which gives maximum valve flow, stays open the entire duration, and immediately snaps shut at closing.  Figure 2.38 compares the actual flow curve with the theoretically "perfect" flow curves to illustrate Avg Flow Coef. 
The Total Avg Flow Coef will compare head and camshaft combinations.  An engine with a Total Avg Flow Coef of 1.0 is physically impossible to build.  In reality, the Total Avg Flow Coef will be approximately .25 for production engines, .30 to .40 for race 2 valve engines, and up to .50 or more for high RPM, 4 valve race engines. Notes: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
The average flow coefficient should not be confused with  Intake or Exhaust Flow Coef in the cylinder Head(s) input specs.  Intake or Exhaust Flow Coef applies only to one particular valve lift (L/D=.25) and the flow at that lift. The average flow coefficient applies to all valve lifts encountered for a particular cam profile, the portion of time at each lift, and the flow potential at each lift for the entire head. 
Technically, the calculation of flow coefficient can vary significantly with the choice of valve opening and closing points.  The lower the lift points chosen, the lower the flow coefficient.  The Engine Analyzer Pro uses a relatively low lift of .003" at the valve to calculate average flow coefficient.  Therefore, average flow coefficients calculated by the Pro are likely to be less than average flow coefficients from other sources. 

Lobe Separation, deg 
Is the separation between the intake and exhaust lobe centerlines in camshaft degrees.  The Engine Analyzer Pro assumes the centerline is where max lift occurs.  You would have to double this value to obtain lobe separation in crankshaft degrees. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Lobe Area, inch*deg 
Is the estimated area of the cam lift profile measured in tappet lift x cam degrees.  See Figure 2.39.   
Overlap, deg 

Is the number of crank degrees where both the intake and exhaust valves are open at least .003".  This value should correlate approximately to most cam grinder's "advertised overlap". 
Duration, deg 
Is the number of crank degrees where the valve is open at least .003" for either the intake or exhaust.  This value should correlate approximately to most cam grinder's "advertised duration". 
Opening Events, deg 
Is the location where the valve has reached .003" lift on the opening ramp. For the intake valve, this is reported in crank degrees BTDC (before top dead center). For the exhaust valve, it's reported in crank degrees BBDC (before bottom dead center).  These values should correlate approximately to most cam grinder's "advertised opening events". 
Closing Events, deg 
Is the location where the valve has reached .003" lift on the closing ramp.  For the intake valve, this is reported in crank degrees ABDC (after bottom dead center).  For the exhaust valve, it's reported in crank degrees ATDC (after top dead center).  These values should correlate approximately to most cam grinder's "advertised closing events". 
Overlap @ .050, deg 
Is the number of crank degrees where both the intake and exhaust tappet are lifted at least .050" above base circle.  This value should correlate to most cam grinder's "overlap @ .050 inches lift". 
Duration @ .050, deg 
Is the number of crank degrees where the tappet is lifted at least .050" above base circle for either intake or exhaust.  This value should correlate to most cam grinder's "duration @ .050 inches lift". 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Opn Evnts @ .050, deg 
Is the location where the tappet has been lifted .050" lift above base circle on the opening ramp.  For the intake tappet, this is reported in crank degrees BTDC (before top dead center).  For the exhaust tappet, it's reported in crank degrees BBDC (before bottom dead center).  These values should correlate to most cam grinder's "opening events @ .050 inches lift". 
Cls Evnts @ .050, deg 
Is the location where the tappet has been lifted .050" lift above base circle on the closing ramp.  For the intake tappet, this is reported in crank degrees ABDC (after bottom dead center).  For the exhaust tappet, it's reported in crank degrees ATDC (after top dead center).  These values should correlate to most cam grinder's "closing events @ .050 inches lift". 
Duration @ .200, deg 
Is the number of crank degrees where the tappet is lifted at least .200" above base circle for either intake or exhaust.  This value should correlate to most cam grinder's "duration @ .200 inches lift".  Events at .200 inches of lift are becoming more common in the aftermarket.  This number gives you and idea of how aggressive the opening and closing ramps are.  If the Pro’s .050” duration matches your cam, but the .200” duration is too low, select a more aggressive Lifter (profile) type in the Cam/Valve Train specs menu. 
Opn Evnts @ .200, deg 
Is the location where the tappet has been lifted .200" lift above base circle on the opening ramp.  For the intake tappet, this is reported in crank degrees BTDC (before top dead center).  For the exhaust tappet, it's reported in crank degrees BBDC (before bottom dead center).  These values should correlate to most cam grinder's "opening events @ .200 inches lift". 
Cls Evnts @ .200, deg 
Is the location where the tappet has been lifted .200" lift above base circle on the closing ramp.  For the intake tappet, this is reported in crank degrees ABDC (after bottom dead center).  For the exhaust tappet, it's reported in crank degrees ATDC (after top dead center).  These values should correlate to most cam grinder's "closing events @ .200 inches lift". 
Lobe Centerlns, deg 
Intake and Exhaust lobe center is simply calculated from the appropriate .050" events and assumes a symmetric cam lobe (if using the standard Pro cam profile).  If you are using cam profile data files, the Lobe Centerlns are based on the maximum lift point in the file.  The intake lobe center is given in crank degrees after TDC, the exhaust lobe center is given in crank degrees before TDC. 
Grss Tappet Lft 
Is the maximum inches the tappet is lifted above base circle.  If you are not using a cam lobe file, it is the same as Max Lobe Lift entered in the Cam/Valve Train specs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
General Engine Calculations 
Displacement, CCs 
Is the total engine displacement volume (swept volume) in cubic centimeters.  This is based on the standard equation including bore, stroke and # cylinders. Divide this value by 1000 to obtain engine displacement in liters.  For example, 4900 CCs is 4900 / 1000 = 4.9 liters. 
Displacement, cu in 
Is the total engine displacement volume (swept volume) in cubic inches.  This is based on the standard equation including bore, stroke and # cylinders.   
Dynamic Comp. Ratio 
Dynamic Comp Ratio is calculated like the Compression Ratio in the Head Specs menu except, the "swept" volume used is the cylinder volume at intake valve closing.  Some people believe this is a more realistic compression ratio because the piston cannot compress the air until the intake valve has closed.   
Dynamic Comp. Ratio = Clearance Volume + Cyl Vol @ Intake Valve Closing Clearance Volume 
The Dynamic Comp. Ratio is always less than the standard Compression Ratio, and ranges from 6 to 9 for most engines.  You've probably heard that long duration cams need higher compression ratios. You will notice that when you specify long duration cams, with late intake valve closing, you must also specify a higher Compression Ratio to maintain a Dynamic Comp. Ratio in the range from 6 to 9. 
Compression Ratio 
Simply restates the specified Compression Ratio in the Head Specs menu for comparison to Dynamic Comp. Ratio. 
Theo. Crank Comprssn,PSI 
Is the estimated cranking compression pressure in pounds per square inch based on compression ratio, estimated intake cam profile and lash.  The calculation assumes some heat losses and leakage (uses ratio of specific heats of 1.3 rather than 1.4). Your actual cranking compression (100-200 RPM) will likely be less due primarily to leakage and heat losses.  Actual compression pressures can be higher with hydraulic lifters, especially high leakdown lifters.  High RPM compression (1000 RPM or higher) would more closely match this value.  Theo. Crank Comprssn is reported simply to show trends. 
Note: The Cylinder Leakage value in the Short Block Specs menu is not used here to adjust Theo. Crank Comprssn.  A standard leakage rating is always used 
A new Preference in v3.9 has new options for calculating Cranking Compression.  See Appendix 11 on page 261 for more updated info. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Clearance Volume, CCs 
Is the calculated total clearance volume in cubic centimeters (piston dish/dome, chamber volume, deck and gasket volume) based on the given Bore, Stroke, Compression Ratio. 
Pk Secondary Tuning RPM 
Is the RPM which exhibits the greatest "secondary" or low speed tuning effects.  Secondary tuning effects are explained in Appendix 3.  If no secondary tuning effects are present, this value is left blank or marked “na”. 
Idle Vacuum, ''Hg 
Is the estimated idle vacuum at 1500 RPM, with no load on the engine (no torque converter).  The Engine Analyzer Pro assumes a constant Barometric Pressure of 29.92 and typical dynamometer testing accessories (water pump, but no fan, power steering, alternator, air conditioning, etc. 
‘Starting Point' Specs For HP Peak @ xxxx RPM 
These 'Starting Point' specs are for users who want help choosing "ball park" cam specs and/or runner sizes for good performance at a particular RPM. These recommendations are very general, being based on very simplified "rules of thumb".  They are based on the current cam specs, bore, stroke, etc.  Therefore, you will get somewhat different recommendations as engine specs change.  
The RPM for these recommendations is entered in the Calculation Conditions menu under the heading ‘Starting Point’ Recommendations as Tuning Recommendations RPM. See page 67. 
Notes: 
Veteran engine builders can likely pick better 'Starting Point' Specs than the Pro simply from their experience.  The "fine tuning" of these specs through detailed, "cut and try" analysis on the computer is the Pro’s real strength. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro does not calculate volumetric efficiency and performance from the same formulas which generate these runner or cam recommendations.  Therefore, these runner recommendations may not produce the best performance in the program, but are simply good starting points. 
A new Preference in v3.3 lets you turn Off this calculation.  The program now comes with this calculation turned Off and hidden to avoid having users think that this calculation was more accurate and sophisticated than it really was.   
Intake Dimensions (for x Runner/cylinder ): 
The following sets of lengths and areas/diameters are 2 combinations which are tuned to the RPM specified.  The notation in parentheses identifies if the areas and diameters assume 1 or 2 runners per cylinder.  This assumption is based on the # Valves/Ports in the Intake section of the Head(s) menu.  For example, the area given for 2 runners per cylinder will be approximately half the area recommended for 1 runner per cylinder.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Note:  These lengths and areas are based on simplistic "rules of thumb" concerning inertia tuning described in Appendix 3.  The actual tuning simulated by the Pro is more detailed and may not completely agree with these recommendations.  Therefore, use the recommendations in this section as a guide, or starting point for choosing runner sizes. 
Recmmnded Length, in and Rec area sq in/in 
Is the recommended total length of the intake runner from the valve seat to the first abrupt opening for good inertia tuning and runner velocity.  This is the sum of Port Length plus Runner Length in the cylinder Head(s) and Intake System menus.  This abrupt opening could be a plenum, branching together with another intake runner, or an opening to atmosphere.  See Runner Length under Intake System. 
Given to the right of the recommended length is recommended runner inside cross sectional area in square inches and inside diameter in inches.  This area will give adequate runner velocity for this length runner at this RPM.  If you have a rectangular runner, calculate the recommended width and height from the following formulas: 
Rec Width = Rec Area Rec Height = Rec Area . Current Runner Height Current Runner Width 
For example, if the recommended area was 2.08 sq in, and your current runner was 1.8 x 1.0: 
Rec Width = 2.08 = 1.16" Rec Height = 2.08 = 2.08” 1.8 1.0 
You could either enlarge the width from 1.0" to 1.16" or enlarge the height from 1.8" to 2.08" to obtain the recommended area, but not both. If you want to increase both width and height, the final dimensions multiplied together should equal the recommended area. 
Current Length, in and Rec Area sq in/in 
For many intake manifolds, it is significantly easier to change the runner area than change the runner length.  Current Length is the current total runner length specified by Port Length plus Runner Length in the cylinder Head(s) and Intake System menus.  The area and diameter given will give good inertia tuning for this engine and this specified runner length.  However, runner velocity may not be optimum.  Also see Recmnded Lenght and Rec Area above. 
Exhaust Dimensions ( for x Runner/cylinder): 
Similar to the intake recommendations, the assumed number of exhaust runners per cylinder is also stated in parentheses. This assumption is based on the # Valves/Ports in the Exhaust section of the Head(s) menu.  For example, the area given for 2 runners per cylinder will be approximately half the area recommended for 1 runner per cylinder.  For example, the area given for 2 runners per cylinder will be approximately half the area recommended for 1 runner per cylinder.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Rec Len, 1st Pulse and Rec Area,300ft/sec 
Is the exhaust runner length to produce strong resonance tuning for this engine.  This resonance pulse is from the first reflection and is usually the strongest pulse available for exhaust resonance tuning. 
The area and diameter given will produce an average "calculated" exhaust runner velocity of 300 ft/sec.  Several sources state this velocity gives good exhaust inertia tuning.  The Pro’s detailed calculations do not use this simple “rule of thumb” but it is a good starting point for many engines. 
Rec Len, 2nd Pulse and Primary Tube O.D. 
Is the exhaust runner length to produce strong resonance tuning for this engine.  This resonance pulse is from the second reflection and is usually not as strong as the first pulse. 
The diameter given is for the outside diameter of 18 gauge tubing which will give a "calculated" exhaust runner velocity of approximately 300 ft/sec.  Also see Rec Len, 1st Pulse and Rec Area, 300 ft/sec. 
Approx Cam Specs for HP Peak @ xxxx ( based on current cam ): 
The following cam specs are estimated to produce a HP peak at the RPM specified above as @ xxxx.  These recommendations are based on these assumptions: 
• 
HP peak will appear at certain MACH #s.  MACH # is based only on intake valve flow potential, intake cam profile and engine size.  See MACH # definition on a previous page. 

• 
Tuning effects are not included, which have a large impact on the particular cam profile and cam timing (lobe centerline) to use. 

• 
Changes in cam duration and lift will produce predictable changes in intake valve flow potential.  The more different the current cam's specs are from the recommended cam's specs, the more error in this assumption. 


Therefore, it is obvious that these recommendations can not accurately predict what camshaft to use for a particular application, but are only a starting point.  These recommendations must be optimized by calculating performance with the Pro, making small changes to these cam specs and then recalculating performance. 
Notes: 
The reliability of these recommendations depends on how close the current cam's specs are to the recommended specs.  If they are significantly different (i.e. current duration is 200 degrees and recommended duration is 300 degrees), the recommendations will not be as reliable. In these cases, enter the recommended cam specs in the Cam/Valve Train menu and recalculate performance.  The new cam recommendations will be more reliable. 
The duration recommendations are limited to 320 degrees maximum and .550" lift maximum. 
HP Pk Int Dur @ .050 and HP Pk, Int Tappet Lift 
Is the recommended intake duration at .050" tappet lift to produce a HP peak at the specified RPM.  The Tappet Lift is a typical lift for a cam lobe with this duration @ .050" designed for a typical American, pushrod V-8. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
HP Pk, Exh Dur @ .050 and HP Pk, Exh Tappet Lift 
Is the recommended exhaust duration at .050" tappet lift to produce approximately 75% exhaust flow area compared to intake flow area of the intake cam profile recommended.  If the engine is currently supercharged or nitrous injected, this percent is raised to 85%.  The Tappet Lift is a typical lift for a cam lobe with this duration @ .050" designed for a typical American, pushrod V-8. . 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9 Calculation Menus: 
The following section explains the user input for engine specs listed with Clc buttons.  These specs are ones where you can simply enter a value, or click on the Clc button and the program will present a menu of inputs which will calculate that particular parameter.  These menus are like computer “scratch pads” for calculating specs like compression ratio, runner diameters from other inputs. 
New Calculation Menus have been added or expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Notes: 
The starting values in each calculation menu are always blanked out.  Once enough specs have been entered, the calculated value(s) at the top of the menu will be displayed.  This calculated value(s) will now be updated each time you change a spec.  If you want to use this calculated value, click on Use Calc Value. If the calculated value is within expected limits, it will be loaded into the original menu.  If you click on Cancel, you will be returned to the original menu with the original value unchanged. If 
you click on Help, you will be given a general explanation of calculation menus, and a page # in this section for more info about the particular menu you are using. 
The input values or calculated values in any calculation menu have NO affect on calculated performance unless you load the Calculated value into the original menu. If you already know a spec in the form required by the program, then you have no need to use the calculation menu. For example, if you know the Compression Ratio is 10.3, you have no need to use a calculation menu to calculate Compression Ratio based on Gasket Thickness, Piston Dome CCs, etc. 
Example: 

You are working with the SUPERSTOCK file for a Super Stock drag car.  Assume you want to calculate the Avg Port Diameter for the intake port in the cylinder Head(s) menu for a new cylinder head.  You click on the Clc button for Avg Port Dia and are shown the Calculation Menu shown in Figure 2.40.  Note that all inputs are blank and only the Know Port CCs? spec is enabled (not dimmed to gray). 
Click on the combo box arrow for Know Port CCs? spec to answer the question Yes or No.  Lets say you select Yes, because you do know the port CCs. This is usually the more accurate way to measure average port diameter.  The specs of Port Length and Port Volume are now enabled (printed in black, not gray). You enter in the values for the new head of Length of 5 inches and a Port Volume of 200 CCs and obtain a Calc Avg Diameter of 1.76.  If you click on Cancel, you will return to the cylinder Head(s) menu with Avg Port Diameter at its original value of 1.78". 
If you had checked on Use Calc Value, you would have returned to the cylinder Head(s) menu with Avg Port Diameter set to the new calculated value of 1.76.  If you now calculate performance, it will be based on the new Avg Port Diameter of 1.76". 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.1 Calc Bearing Size 
Is the Bearing Size calculated from the following specs.  Bearing Size is defined on page 14 under Short Block specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.   
Bearing size is very dependent on engine Bore and # Cylinders.  The Notes section at the bottom of this menu show these current settings in the program.  If these are incorrect, click on Cancel and change these two specs before going using this menu. 
# Main Bearings Main Bearing Diameter; in Main Bearing Width; in 
These 3 specs define the size of the main crankshaft bearings, which support the crankshaft in the block.  If the bearings are not all the same size, use the size of the most common main bearing.  See Figure 2.41 for definitions of Diameter and 
   Width 
Width measurements in inches.  "Micrometer" accuracy is not necessary, measurements within .05 inches are sufficient. 

Diameter Examples:  The # Main Bearings for a V-8 is usually 5; for a "truck" inline 6 cylinder, usually 7; single cylinder, usually 2; in line 4 cylinder, usually 5, etc.   
Figure 2.41  Bearing Dimensions 
# Rod Bearings Rod Bearing Diameter; in Rod Bearing Width, in 
These 3 specs define the size of the connecting rod bearings.  See Figure 2.41 for definitions of Diameter and Width measurements in inches.  "Micrometer" accuracy is not necessary, measurements within .05 inches are sufficient. 
The # Rod Bearings is almost always equal to the # cylinders. 
# Cam Bearings Cam Bearing Diameter; in Cam Bearing Width, in 
These 3 specs define the size of the camshaft bearings.  If the bearings are not all the same size, use the size of the most common cam bearing.  See Figure 2.41 for definitions of Diameter and Width measurements in inches.  "Micrometer" accuracy is not necessary, measurements within .05 inches are sufficient. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.2 Calc Total Inertia 
Is the Total Inertia calculated from the following specs.  Total Inertia is defined on page 16 under Short Block specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  The equation for Total Inertia depends on the engine displacement.  This displacement is based on the current Bore, Stroke and # Cylinders in the Short Block menu  and is displayed in the Notes section at the bottom of this menu.  Make sure this displacement matches the engine for which you are calculating Total Inertia, before using this menu. 
Remember, that Engine Inertia, Lb x Ft^2 is a combo box in the Short Block Specs menu.  You can just select a typical description from the list (by clicking on the combo boxes arrow button) and have the program estimate the system’s total inertia. 
Engine Specs Component Wts 
This combo box lets you pick a general description of the engine’s rotating and reciprocating components.  This general description modifies the inertia of the base engine without the flywheel. 
Flywheel Weight, lbs Flywheel Diameter; in 
These 2 specs define the weight and diameter of the engine flywheel.  The engine flywheel makes up most of the engine's rotating inertia, and is why it is the only engine component itemized.  In a vehicle installation, the flywheel weight should include the clutch disk and pressure plate.  For a dynamometer installation, this represents all rotating adapters, flanges, etc mounted between the crankshaft and the dynamometer input shaft. 
Although all these components can be of different diameters, use the diameter of the heaviest component. 
Dyno Specs 
Rotating Mass Weight, lbs 
Rotating Mass Diameter 
These 2 specs define the weight and diameter of the dynamometer.  For small water brake dynos, these values are in the range of 20-40 lbs and 8"-12" in diameter.  Unless you have measurements, we recommend using 25 lbs and 9" for water brake dynos.  For large electric dynamometers, these values can be hundreds of pounds and 20"-30" in diameter.  However, large electric dynos are rarely used for accelerating tests, where inertia is a factor. 
Figure 2.42 illustrates the relationship between acceleration, rotating inertia and torque measurement. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

2.9.3 Calc Avg Port Diameter 
Is the Port Diameter or Runner Diameter calculated from following specs. Port Diameter is defined on page 17 under cylinder Head(s) specs. Runner Diameter is defined on page 25 under Intake System specs and on page 35 under Exhaust System specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Know Port CCs? 
Click on this combo box to select Yes or No.  Your choice here will enable (turn to black print from gray and allow for inputs) different specs in this menu.  You must select this choice first before any other specs in this menu can be entered. 
Calculating Avg Diameter from volume is generally the more accurate method. If you are using intake runners with a significant amount of taper, answer No to Know Port CCs, and use the Width and Height at the head to estimate the effective diameter at the head.  Then use the calculation menu to calculate Runner Taper.  For exhaust headers, it is usually best to simply subtract .1" from the tubing OD to obtain the inside runner diameter. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Port Length, in 
The length of the port or runner along its centerline in inches.  For a port, this would start at the valve stem (center) location at the valve seat or valve throat. It would continue down the middle of the port to the manifold or header mating surface.  For many intake ports, 5" is a typical length, for the exhaust port, 3” is more typical. 

For an intake runner, this is the length from the cylinder head to the first "abrupt enlargement"  upstream of the cylinder head.  The "abrupt enlargement" can be several different things: 
• 
The intake manifold plenum.  The plenum is the open area where all the runners merge, directly under the carburetor(s) or after the throttle body on fuel injected manifolds.  The best example of a plenum is the very evident “box” on “tunnel ram” type manifolds. 

• 
The end which is open to atmosphere (or air cleaner) on individual runner fuel injection or carburetion.  For individual runner carb systems, the runner length actually extends through the carb and through any velocity stack or air horn. 

• 
Any point where a runner from one cylinder merges with a runner from another cylinder. 


For an exhaust runner, this is also the length from the cylinder head to the first "abrupt enlargement"  downstream of the exhaust port.  On the exhaust side, the "abrupt enlargement" can be: 
• 
The header collector where individual tubes merge together. 

• 
The end which is open to atmosphere on individual runner exhaust headers.  

• 
Any point where a runner from one cylinder merges with a runner from another cylinder. 


Again, for the Exhaust Runner Diameter, it is usually best to simply subtract .1" from exhaust header tubing OD to estimate their inside runner diameters, rather than use this calculation menus. 
Port/Runner Volume. CCs 
Is the volume of liquid required to fill the port or runner in cubic centimeters.  For a cylinder head, this is a common spec head manufacturers quote.   
For an intake or exhaust manifold, you will likely have to measure this yourself.  This measurement does not require the precision of "cc'ing" combustion chambers.  That's because for most intake or exhaust manifolds there is no clear distinction where the runner ends. Cover the "manifold to head" mounting surface with a plate or heavy tape.  Tip the manifold so you can pour in liquid from a graduated cylinder or other measuring device, through the carb or exhaust pipe opening.  Fill until you believe the liquid is to the "abrupt enlargement" defined above. 
Port Width, in 
The average width of the port or runner along its entire length in inches. This can usually be estimated at the end of the port or runner at the cylinder head-manifold/header mating surface. 
Port Height, in 
The average height of the port or runner along its entire length in inches.  This can usually be estimated at the end of the port or runner at the cylinder head-manifold/header mating surface.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Port Shape 
Describes the general shape of the runner along its entire length.  Your choices are: 
• 
Rectangular 

• 
Rounded Rectangular 

• 
Oval A purely Rectangular runner would have sharp corners and a purely Oval runner would be 2 semicircles connected by 2 straight sections.  See Figure 2.43.  Actual runners are likely somewhere between these two shapes, which is the Rounded Rectangular choice. 


2.9.4 Calc Valve Flow Coef 
Is the Flow Coef for either the intake or exhaust port and valve calculated from following specs.  Valve Flow Coef is defined on pages 18-20 under cylinder Head(s) specs. You would use this menu if you have flow bench data at only 1 or just a few lift points.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
This Clc button is not enabled unless you have selected the Use Single Flow Coef option. Once enabled, if you click on it, you will be presented with the specs outlined below.  These specs will be explained based on a typical flow curve shown in Figure 2.44. 
Test Pressure, “Water 

        Rounded Rectangular 

    Figure 2.44  Typical Flow Curve (valve dia=1.52)
  Flow, CFM                    Lift = Diameter  @ 25”                   
4         200                Lift = .38”         150                CFM = 192         100
           50
 0 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5       Valve Lift, inches 
Is the pressure drop maintained across the port and valve during the flow test, measured in inches of water.  From Figure 2.44, you would enter 25.  If you have test pressure in inches of Mercury, multiply by 13.6 to obtain "Water. 
Test Pressure, " Water = Test Pressure, " Mercury x 13.6 
This is initially set to 28 when you enter this menu, because 28” is so common.  However, you can change it to most anything you want.  Ten (10) and 25” are other common flow bench test pressures. 
# Valves/Cylinder 
The number of intake or exhaust valves being flowed during the test.  Most cylinder heads have only 1 intake and 1 exhaust valve, so this value would be 1.  This number is set to whatever is currently in the # Valves/Ports spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Valve Diameter, in 
Identifies the outside (largest) diameter of the head of the valve(s) in inches.  From Figure 2.44, you would enter 1.52. This number is set to whatever is currently in the Valve Diameter spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
Valve Lift Tested, in 
Is the valve lift at which the flow data CFM is measured.  Use a valve lift (and corresponding CFM flow) as close as practical to one fourth the valve head's diameter.  A range of lifts close to 1/4 the valve’s diameter is given in the Notes at the bottom of this menu  The program will warn you when Valve Lift is not 1/4 of Valve Diameter in this menu.  For example, for a 1.52" diameter valve, use flow (CFM) at .38" valve lift.  CFM at .4 lift would also be acceptable.  See Figure 2.44. 
Note:  This is NOT valve lift produced by the cam 
Flow Obtained, CFM 
Is the CFM flow obtained at the valve lift given for Valve Lift.  Shown in Figure 2.44 is a typical flow curve from a flow bench.  For this data you would use the 192 CFM value. For most conditions, it is best to install a radiused inlet on the intake and a short "stub stack" (see page 24 for a source) on the exhaust, rather than just flow the head only. 
2.9.5 Calc Anti-Reversion 
Is the anti-reversion for either the intake or exhaust port and valve calculated from the following specs.  Anti-reversion is defined on page 22 under cylinder Head(s) specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use. 
Flow -Normal Direction, CFM 
Is the CFM recorded when flowing the head in the proper flow direction.  For the intake port, you will be drawing air from the room; for the exhaust you will push air from the port into the room.   
Many times the intake manifold or exhaust header have features to limit reverse flow.  Therefore, perform this test with the intake manifold or exhaust header installed.   
Generally, flow in the reverse direction only occurs during overlap or at intake closing, both of which are at small lift.  It is therefore recommended that you check Anti-Reversion at a low lift, like .100” to obtain flow in both the normal and reverse direction. See Example 4.4. 
Flow-Reverse Direction, CFM 
Is the CFM recorded when flowing the head in the reverse flow direction at the same test pressure and valve lift as Flow-Normal Direction.  For the intake port, you will be pushing air from the port into the room; for the exhaust you will drawing air from the room.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
The recommended test procedure is given below and in Example 4.4: 
• 
Install the head with either the intake or exhaust manifold installed on the head. 

• 
Set a low valve lift, a lift of .100” works well. 

• 
Flow the port in correct direction, recording CFM. 

• 
Change nothing but the flow bench flow direction and immediately flow in the reverse direction, recording CFM. 


2.9.6 Calc Compression Ratio 
Is the Compression Ratio calculated from the following specs and the current cylinder volume (based on the current Bore and Stroke in the Short Block menu).  Compression Ratio is defined on page 22 under cylinder Head(s) specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
The equation for Compression Ratio depends on the cylinder displacement.  This displacement is based on the current Bore and Stroke in the Short Block menu  and is displayed in the Notes section at the bottom of this menu.  Make sure these specs match the engine for which you are calculating Compression Ratio before using this menu. 
Chamber Specs Chamber CCs in Head 
Is the combustion chamber volume in the cylinder head, measured in cubic centimeters.  This is the value obtained if the heads are "cc'd". 
If you know the entire clearance volume of the cylinder, but do not know Piston Dome CCs, Gasket Thickness or Deck Height Clearance, enter that volume here as Chamber CCs in Head.  Then enter 0 for Piston Dome CCs, Gasket Thickness and Deck Height Clearance.  The program will calculate compression ratio based on the equation below where Clearance Volume is the Chamber CCs in Head. 
Compression Ratio = Clearance Volume + Swept Volume Clearance Volume 
Piston Dome CCs 
Is the volume of the "pop up" in the piston measured in cubic centimeters.  The "pop up" is the volume of piston material added to the top of a flat top piston. If the piston has a "dish" (depression), enter the dish volume as a negative (-) number. 
Gasket Thickness, in 
Is the thickness of the head gasket in inches after it has been "crushed".  "Crushed" thickness is after the head bolts have been torqued to spec. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Gasket Bore Diameter, in 
Is the diameter of the bore in the head gasket.  A good approximation is to use the same as the Bore in the Short Block Specs menu, and this value is loaded in when you first open up this menu. You can change it to most any value you want. (In actual use, gasket bores are usually .030-.100” larger than the cylinder bore.) 
Deck Height Clearance, in 
Deck Height Clearance is the distance in inches from the top of the piston to the top of the cylinder block when the piston is at TDC. The top of the cylinder is the deck, or surface to which the head bolts.  If the outer edge of the piston travels above the deck, this is called negative deck height and you must enter a negative (-) number. 
2.9.7 Calc Runner Flow Coef 
Is the intake or exhaust Runner Flow Coef calculated from the following specs.  Runner Flow Coef is defined on page 26 under Intake System specs and page 36 under Exhaust System specs.  Also see Section 2.9.4 describing Valve Flow Coef.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Flow Data, Head Only Test Pressure, “Water 
The pressure drop maintained across the port, valve and runner during both portions of the flow test, measured in inches of water. If you have test pressure in inches of Mercury, multiply by 13.6 to obtain "Water. 
Test Pressure, " Water = Test Pressure, " Mercury x 13.6 
This is initially set to 28 when you enter this menu, because 28” is so common.  However, you can change it to most anything you want.  Ten (10) and 25” are other common flow bench test pressures. 
# Valves/Cylinder 
The number of intake or exhaust valves being flowed during the test.  Most cylinder heads have only 1 intake and 1 exhaust valve, so this value would be 1.  This number is set to whatever is currently in the # Valves/Ports spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
Valve Diameter,in 
Identifies the outside (largest) diameter of the head of the valve(s) in inches.  This number is set to whatever is currently in the Valve Diameter spec in the Head(s) menu for this port.  If this is not correct for the flow test, you must change this in the Head(s) menu before using this calculation menu.  You can not change this number in this menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Valve Lift Tested, in 
Is the valve lift at which the flow data CFM is measured.  Use a valve lift (and corresponding CFM flow) as close as practical to one fourth the valve head's diameter.  A range of lifts close to 1/4 the valve’s diameter is given in the Notes at the bottom of this menu  The program will warn you when Valve Lift is not 1/4 of Valve Diameter in this menu.  For example, for a 1.52" diameter valve, use flow (CFM) at .38" valve lift.  CFM at .4 lift would also be acceptable.  See Figure 2.33. 
Note:  This is NOT valve lift produced by the cam 
Flow w/o Runner, CFM 
Is the CFM flow obtained at the valve lift given for Valve Lift with only the cylinder head being flowed.  This flow should be the maximum obtainable for the head only. 
To obtain maximum flows, the entrance to the intake port should have an "optimum bell mouth" or "radiused" adapter for smooth air entry.  The exhaust side may also benefit from installing a short (3-12"), straight section of smooth pipe.  You can experiment by simply holding tubes of various lengths and diameters up to the exhaust port, to see the effect on flow.  Once you know the approximate dimensions which give maximum exhaust flow, you may want to make a more permanent exhaust adapter for your flow tests. 
Flow Data with x Runner 
The x in this heading is to indicate you must flow all runners connected to this cylinder for this test.  For example, if the engine has 2 intake valves and 2 intake runners for each cylinder, you must first flow both valves with no runner, then add both runners and flow it again. 
Runner Diameter, in 
Is the Runner Diameter you will use for this runner in either the Intake or Exhaust System menu.  This value is initially loaded into this menu, but you can change if you want.  If the runner is primarily oval or rectangular, use the Calc Runner Diameter calculation menu in the Intake or Exhaust System menu first to obtain an effective Runner Diameter. 
Flow with Runner,CFM 
Once you have the maximum flow value for the head only, Flow  w/o Runner, install the manifold or header.  At exactly the same valve lift and test pressure, repeat the test.  Your flow value should drop.  If it does not drop, obviously you did not have an optimum entrance or exit adapter, since the manifold you are now flowing is more optimum. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro should calculate a value for Calc Runner Flow Coef of somewhere between 0.5 and 3.0.  The larger the drop in flow between the head only and head plus manifold/header, the worse (smaller) the runner flow coef.  However, like Valve Flow Coef, a small runner which reduces flow considerable, may have an excellent flow coefficient.  This means it is well designed for its size, but its size is the restriction, not its design. 
If you enter a Flow with Runner which is greater than or equal to Flow w/o Runner, the Engine Analyzer Pro simply calculates a maximum flow coefficient of 3. 
Notes: 
When flow testing an intake manifold, be sure the other runners are blocked off.  Also, do not install the carburetor.  The Engine Analyzer Pro treats the carburetor restriction differently from the valve, port and runner restrictions.  Occasionally a manifold 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
may flow better with the carb or throttle body than without.  In these instances, you should provide an "optimum entrance" at the carb pad, since the carb itself would be a significant restriction.  An optimum entrance can be molded out of clay. 
It may be more convenient to just flow the cylinder head with the intake and exhaust manifold/header installed, rather than trying to develop "optimum adapters".  If this is what you want to do, see Example 4.4. 
If you did not exactly have an "optimum" adapter for obtaining Flow w/o Runner, then your Valve Flow Coef will be too low and your Runner Flow Coef will be too high.  Also see Examples 4.4 and 4.5. 
Accurate determination of Runner Flow Coef has three advantages: 
• 
You can more accurately swap manifold runners onto heads (in the computer) which have not been flowed together. 

• 
You gain insight as to manifold and header flow restriction and design.  Manifolds and headers with low flow coefficients have much potential for flow gains from redesign and porting.  Flow restrictions from components with high flow coefficients indicate the size of the component is more of a restriction than its design.   

• 
Runner Flow Coef has a significant effect on tuning, however this effect is not yet clearly understood.  See Appendix 3. 


2.9.8 Calc Taper, deg 
Is the Taper angle for either the intake runner in the manifold or the collector of the exhaust header calculated from the 
following specs.  Taper is defined on page 28 under Intake System specs and page 39 under Exhaust System specs. See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
The equation for Taper depends on the length of the Intake Runner or Exhaust Collector.  This length is based on the current settings of these specs in the Intake System or Exhaust System specs menus and is displayed in the Notes section at the bottom of this menu.  Make sure this length matches the runner or collector for which you are calculating Taper before using this 

menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Runner Specs at Head 
or Specs at Entrance (by primaries) 
Know 
From this combo box, choose what you know about the end of the runner at the head or collector at the primary pipes.  This is the end closest to the engine and is usually the smaller diameter or area.  You can pick from 5 choices: 
• 
Diameter, circular 

• 
Area in square inches 

• 
Width & Height, rectangular 

• 
Width & Height, oval 

• 
Width & Height, rounded rectangle 


See Figure 2.43 for shapes for Width and Height options.  Your choice here will enable or disable the other specs in this section of this menu. 
Diameter, in 
If the effective diameter of the end closest to the engine in inches.  The appropriate value from either the Intake System or Exhaust System specs menu is initially loaded, but you can change this value.  If you are not sure of this diameter, you should use a Calculation menu to obtain this value before using this menu. 
Area, sq in 
Is the area of the end closest to the engine, in square inches. 
Width, in 
Is the width of the end closest to the engine, in inches, for the particular shape you chose for the Know combo box described on the previous page. 
Height, in 
Is the height of the end closest to the engine, in inches, for the particular shape you chose for the Know combo box described on the previous page. 
Specs at Runner Entrance 
Specs at Collector Exit 
Know 
Diameter, in 
Area, sq in 
Width, in 
Height, in 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
These specs have the same definitions as those listed in the previous section Runner Specs at Head or Specs at Entrance (by primaries). 
2.9.9 Calc CFM Flow Rating 
Is the CFM Flow Rating calculated from the following specs.  CFM Flow Rating is defined on page 29 under Intake System specs. See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.   
You will first be asked: 
Do you have flow bench data for estimating CFM rating ? 
If you answer Yes, you will be presented with the specs outlined in 2.9.9.2.  If you answer No, the following specs will be presented. 
Note: The most accurate way to determine the CFM Flow Rating is to flow the component on a flow bench. The second best way is to use the manufacturer's CFM rating at 1.5" Hg, or rating at 3" Hg and convert it to 1.5" by multiplying by .71.  Only if these other methods are not available, should you use the Calculation Menu based on diameter measurements. 
2.9.9.1 Calc CFM Flow Rating 
Total # Pri. Throttle Plates 
The total # of primary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 2. 
Primary Throttle Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter. 
Total # Sec. Throttle Plates 
The total # of secondary barrels.  For a single 4-V carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 4. 
Secondary Throttle Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Sec Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter.  If Total # Sec. Throttle Plates is set to 0, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
Note: Primary throttles and secondary throttles are not treated differently in this calculation menu.  The only reason they are listed separately here is to easily handle throttle plates which are different sizes.  For example, if the primary and secondary throttles were the same size in the three 2 barrel examples above, you could have used 6 Pri Throttles, 0 Sec Throttles and arrived at the same answer. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Restrictor Plate Specs 
Restrictor Plate Installed 
If the carb is used with a restrictor plate, choose Yes.  Restrictor plates are special orifice plates mounted below (or after) the carburetor to limit power for special classes of racing.  Chances are, if you do not know what a restrictor plate is, you would choose No here. 
# Restrictor Holes 
The total # holes in the restrictor plate which all engine air must pass through.  If Restrictor Plate Installed is set to No, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
Hole Diameter; in 
The diameter of each hole in the restrictor plate in inches.  If Restrictor Plate Installed is set to No, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
% Design Improved 
This spec has to do with how the orifice plate is mounted, and what type of transition pieces can be installed on top and below the plate. A plate with no transition pieces and several inches between the carb and the restrictor plate would be called 0 % improved.  Where class rules allow, the plate may be "sandwiched" between transition pieces, which can greatly improve flow.  This could be called 100% improved.  See Figure 2.46. 

from flow bench data. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Note:  Since this calculation is based on flow data for the 

actual carburetor or throttle body, this is the most accurate method of determining CFM Flow Rating.  If the value you obtain here is significantly different than the manufacturer's CFM rating at 1.5" Hg, double check your flow data.  The manufacturer's CFM rating should not be more than 15% different, unless you have made modifications to the carb. 
Flow Bench Data 
Flow Bench Flow, CFM 
The CFM recorded when flowing the carb or throttle body on the flow bench. 
Bench Test Pres, “ water 
The test pressure when flowing the carb or throttle body on the flow bench.  This is usually 10, 12, 20, 25 or 28 inches of water.  If you flow at 20.4" of water, you are flowing at 1.5" Hg and the CFM you record is the carb's CFM Flow Rating. 
% Carb Flowed 
Choices in this combo box let you describes if these flow numbers represent the engine's total carburetor or throttle body flow area. For example: 
• 
If you flowed 1 4BBL carb and the engine is run with this 1 4BBL, you would choose 100%.  These flow numbers represent the engine's entire carburetor flow. 

• 
If you flowed 1 4BBL carb, but the engine is run with dual 4BBLs, you would choose 50%, since the test CFM for 1 4BBL only represents half of the engine's carburetors. 

• 
Assume you have a small flow bench and a Quadra-Jet carb.  If you flow the entire carb, the test pressure is quite low.  However if you block off 1 secondary and 1 primary, the test pressure increases up to 6 ''water.  You record 202 CFM for this condition. You would enter 6 for Bench Test Pres, 202 for Flow Bench Flow and choose 50% for % Carb Flowed. 


Note:  This specs says % Carb flowed but it is equally accurate to estimating the CFM Flow Rating of a throttle body system.  
2.9.10 Calc Air Cleaner CFM 
Is the Air Cleaner CFM rating calculated from the following specs in CFM at 3 ''water pressure drop.  Air Cleaner CFM rating is defined on page 30 under Intake System specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use. 
Air Cleaner Shape 
This combo box lets you pick the general shape of the air cleaner element: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
• 
No Air Cleaner 

• 
Round(cylinder) as shown in Figure 2.42 

• 
Square (flat) a flat, rectangular element, typical of modern fuel injected engines 


Diameter, in or Width, in 
If you select Round as the Shape, this spec will be marked Diameter.  If you selected Square as the Shape, this spec will be marked Width.  Enter the appropriate dimension as shown in Figure 2.47 in inches. 
Height, in 
Is the height dimension as pictured in Figure 2.47, in inches.   
Note: If the engine is equipped with 2 air cleaners of this certain size, in parallel (half the air goes through 1 filter and half through the other) double this dimension.  If the engine has 2 air cleaners of this size, in series (all air goes through 1 filter and then again through the other) cut this dimension in half. 
Element Type 
Pick the appropriate element type from this combo box, Paper or Foam. 
Note:  Foam is not always lower restriction than paper.  Depending on manufacturer, OEM paper elements may actually be less restrictive than aftermarket paper or foam elements.  However, this calculation always assumes Foam is less restrictive. 
Silencing ‘Snorkel’ 
Most production air cleaner housings have some type of "venturi" restriction for reducing intake noise.  Choose Yes for these type of air cleaners.  Choose No for most all types of performance, aftermarket air cleaners where the element is well exposed. 
2.9.11 Calc Plenum Vol, cu in 
Is the Plenum Volume calculated from the following specs in cubic inches.  Plenum Volume is defined on page 30 under Intake System specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Plenum Specs 
Calculation Type 
This combo box lets you pick how the calculation should be made, either 
• 
Dimensions like height, width, depth, etc. 

• 
% Engine Displacement like a percent of the engine’s cubic inches 


Your choice here will determine which specs are enabled or disabled in this menu. 
Shape 
If you select Dimensions for the Calculation Type, this combo box lets you pick the general shape of the plenum when view from the front of the 
Figure 2.48  Plenum Shapes (viewed from end) 
engine: 
• Rectangular 
    Rectangular Oval 
• 
Rounded 

Rectangular 

• 
Oval 

• 
V-Bottom 



See Figure 2.48 for examples. 
 Rounded Rectangular V Bottom 
Length, in 
If you select Dimensions for the Calculation Type, this dimension represents the length of the plenum.  See Figure 2.49. 
Width, in 
If you select Dimensions for the Calculation Type, this dimension represents the width of the plenum.  See Figure 2.49. 
Depth, in 
If you select Dimensions for the Calculation Type, this dimension represents the depth of the plenum.  See Figure 2.49. 
Depth in Center, in 
If you select Dimensions for the Calculation Type and V Bottom for Shape, this dimension represents the depth at the center of the plenum.  See Figure 2.49. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Fraction Eng Disp 
If you do not have exact dimensions of the plenum or the plenum is complicated to measure, you can estimate the plenum size as a percent of the engine’s displacement.  If you select % Displacement for the Calculation Type, choose the appropriate % rating from this combo box. 
2.9.12 Calc Carb Area, sq in 
or Calc Throttle Body Area, sq in 
Is the Total Carb or Total Throttle Body area calculated from the following specs in square inches.  Total Carb Area or Total Throttle Body Area are defined on page 31 under Intake System specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
If most of the ducting before or after the throttle plates is larger or smaller than the throttle plate itself, increase or decrease the throttle diameters to show this more true diameter of entire duct. 
Know 
This combo box lets you pick how the calculation should be made, either from: 
• 
4 Barrel CFM Rating like a 600 CFM carb (this is usually easier but is more of an estimate) 

• 
Dimensions like throttle plate size, number of throttle planes, etc. 


CFM Rating CFM * 
This is the Total CFM rating for all throttle plates on the engine, either Carbs or Throttle Bodies.  This spec is enabled only if you said you Know 4 Barrel CFM Rating.  This spec is initially set to the Total CFM Rating from the Intake Specs menu, but you can change it to any value you want.  Be sure to use a 4 Barrel CFM Rating which means it was tested at 1.5” mercury pressure drop (20.4” water).  Use this conversion to convert from a 2 barrel CFM rating: 
4 Barrel CFM = 2 Barrel CFM x .71 
For example, a 350 CFM 2 barrel would give a 350 x .71 =  249 CFM 4 barrel rating. 
Total # Pri. Throttle Plates 
The total # of primary barrels.  For a single 4 barrel carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 2.  This spec is enabled only if you said you Know Dimensions. 
Primary Throttle Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter. This spec is enabled only if you said you Know Dimensions. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Total # Sec. Throttle Plates 
The total # of secondary barrels.  For a single 4 barrel carburetor, this would be 2, for three 2 barrel carbs this would be 4. This spec is enabled only if you said you Know Dimensions. 
Secondary Throttle Dia, in 
The diameter of the throttle opening or throttle butterfly plate for the Sec Throttle Plates, not venturi diameter.  If Total # Secondary Throttle Plates is set to 0 or you said you Know 4 Barrel CFM Rating, this value is disabled (dimmed to gray) and ignored. 
Note: Primary throttles and secondary throttles are not treated differently in this calculation menu.  The only reason they are listed separately here is to easily handle throttle plates which are different sizes.  For example, if the primary and secondary throttles were the same size in the three 2 barrel examples above, you could have used 6 Pri Throttles, 0 Sec Throttles and arrived at the same answer. 
2.9.13 Calc Venturi CD 
Is the Venturi Discharge Coef (CD) calculated the from following specs.  Venturi Discharge Coef is defined on page 34 under Intake System specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Main Venturi Dia, in 
The diameter of the main venturi (not the smaller booster venturi) for the carb bore being flowed, in inches.   
Main Venturi Flow; CFM 
The air flow being drawn through the venturi being tested in CFM.  The basic procedure for this test includes: 
• 
Block off all carb throttle bores except the one to be flowed.  Be sure to block off all other fuel and air metering passages in the carb.  

• 
Flow this one throttle bore with the throttle plate at full open. 

• 
Set a test pressure similar to that "seen" by the engine at the HP peak, but not less than 8" water.  For example, if the engine will be equipped with 1 4BBL, and the Engine Analyzer Pro predicts 1" mercury Intake Vac at the HP peak, set approximately 1” mercury (13.6 " water ) test pressure.  (Multiply " mercury by 13.6 to obtain " water.) 

• 
Measure the Booster Signal vacuum produced by the main venturi and booster venturi combination in ''water.  This is done by attaching a manometer line to the main metering jet.  For accurate readings, the power valve flow channel and air bleed should be blocked. 


If the carb and test work properly, you should be able to record sets of different Venturi Flows (from different test pressures) and Booster Signals.  Each set should produce approximately the same Calc Venturi CD when entered into this menu. 
Booster Signal, “ water 
Is the venturi vacuum measured at the main metering jet, in inches of water. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9.14 Calc Exh Sys CFM Rating 
Is the Exhaust/Muffler System CFM Rating calculated from the following specs. Exhaust/Muffler System CFM Rating is defined on page 37 under Exhaust System specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use. 
Note: The CFM Rating calculated in this menu is a very approximate estimate.  That is because both inputs are vague and open to interpretation.  For that reason, please read Exhaust/Muffler System CFM Rating starting on page 37 for alternate methods to estimate this value. 
Engine HP 
The rated horsepower output of the engine for which the exhaust system was originally designed.  This defines the approximate amount of exhaust flow the system was designed to handle. 
Type of Vehicle 
Describes the application for which the exhaust system was originally designed.  This defines the approximate amount of backpressure the exhaust system was designed to produce. 
• 
Full Race is an exhaust system with extremely low back pressure, designed for classes of racing where rules require mufflers. 

• 
Aftermarket is an exhaust system with very low back pressure, but still quiet enough for the street (as long as you do not go full throttle). 

• 
Prod Sporty is a production exhaust system for performance and sports cars which must pass full power noise standards. 

• 
Prod Quiet is a production exhaust system for a family sedan or luxury sedan where a "throaty" engine roar is undesirable. 


2.9.15 Calc Collector Dia, in 
Is the Collector Dia calculated from the following specs. Collector Dia is defined on page 39 under Exhaust System specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Header Specs 
Primary Pipe Dia, in 
Is the inside diameter of the primary headers pipes where they enter the collector in inches.  If you have specified Tapered or Stepped pipes, this is the Inside Dia at Exit diameter from the Exhaust System menu.  This value is initially set to the appropriate diameter from the Exhaust System menu, either Inside Dia at Head or Inside Dia at Exit, but you can change it to anything you wish. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
# Pri. Pipes/Collector 
This spec is based on the Short Block spec '# Cylinders'.  This is  the arrangement assumed in the program's calculations and can not be changed.  For example, if you specify # Cylinders greater than 5 cylinders; the program assumes half this # Cylinders primaries converge to the collector respectively.  This spec is determined by the program and can not be changed.   
You must enter the correct # Cylinders in the Short Block menu before using this calculation menu.  
Area Change 
This combo box lets you pick a percent change in the area of the entrance to the collector compared to the combined area of all the primary header pipes which enter the collector.  For example, if you want the area of the collector to equal the area of the primary pipes at the collector, choose “No area change”.  If you want the area of the collector to be 20% greater than the combined area of pipes at the collector, choose “20 % more”. 
2.9.16 Calc Eff Valve Mass, gms 
Is the Eff Valve Mass calculated from the following specs in grams.  Eff Valve Mass is defined on page 47 under Cam/Valve Train specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Valve Weight, gms 
The weight of one valve in grams.  Even if there are 2 or 3 intake or exhaust valves per cylinder, enter the weight of only 1 valve. 
Retainer + Locks Wt, gms 
The weight of one valve spring retainer and the locks or keepers which attach the retainer to the valve stem, in grams.  Even if there are 2 or 3 intake or exhaust valves per cylinder, enter the weight of only 1 retainer and 1 set of locks. 
Spring + Damper Weight, gms 
The weight of all valve springs and "spring like" dampers for one valve in grams.  Even if there are 2 or 3 intake or exhaust valves per cylinder, enter the weight of the valve springs for only 1 valve.  (Do not enter weights for "cup type" dampers which do not move with the valve spring.) 
Rocker Arm wo Fulcrum, gms 
The weight of one rocker arm in grams.  Do not include the weight of the fulcrum.  The fulcrum is the non-rotating pivot the rocker arm rotates on. 
2.9.17 Calc R.A. Stiffness 
Is the Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss calculated from the following specs in pounds per inch.  Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss is defined on page 47 under Cam/Valve Train specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
This calculation requires you to run a fairly sophisticated (and somewhat dangerous) test on the assembled engine.  The test procedure includes: 
• 
Removing (or dropping) the valve for the rocker arm you want to test. 

• 
If you have hydraulic lifters, you must collapse the lifter (allow all the oil to leak out). 

• 
Make up a fixture to apply a force at the rocker arm tip and install a dial indicator to measure rocker arm tip movement.  See Figure 2.50. 

• 
Zero the dial indicator with no force (no weights) applied. 

• 
Apply 500-1000 lbs of force (50-100 lbs of weight) while measuring the rocker arm tip movement.  Enter these readings in this menu.  If the engine is mounted on an engine stand, be sure it can not spin or tip over during this process. 

• 
Remove the force and check that the dial indicator returns to zero. 


Safety Note:  This test should only be attempted by qualified mechanics, machinists or engine builders taking the proper precautions. 
Note:  Accurate numbers are difficult and time consuming to obtain.  Unless you are doing valve train analysis or valve train and cam design, it is recommended that you simply use estimates from Table 2.13, page 47. 
Force on R.A. Tip, lbs 
The total force applied to the rocker arm tip, in pounds. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Deflection of R.A. Tip, in 
The amount of movement of the rocker arm tip from the force applied, in inches. 
2.9.18 Calc Eff Lifter Mass, gms 
Is the Eff Lifter Mass calculated from the following specs in grams.  Eff Lifter Mass is defined on page 48 under Cam/Valve Train specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Pushrod, gms 
The weight of one pushrod in grams. 
Lifter, gms 
The weight of the lifter, tappet or follower which "rides" on the cam lobe in gms. 
Rocker Arm wo fulcrum, gms 
The weight of one rocker arm in grams.  Do not include the weight of the fulcrum.  The fulcrum is the non-rotating pivot the rocker arm rotates on. 
2.9.19 Calc Spring Rate, lb/in 
Calc Seated Spring Force, lb 
Are the Spring Rate and Seated Spring Force calculated from the following specs in pounds per inch and pounds respectively. Spring Rate and Seated Spring Force are defined on page 48 under Cam/Valve Train specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Since these 2 specs are so related, they are calculated at the same time from the same inputs. 
Seated Spring Force, lbs 
The force (sometimes called pressure) applied by the spring to hold the valve on its seat.  This is also the force generated by the spring when it is compressed to its installed height.  This force is stated directly as Calc Seated Spring Force. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Seated Spring Height, in 
The compressed height of the valve spring when the valve is seated.  
At One Other Lift 
Spring Force, lbs 
The force (sometimes called pressure) required to compress the valve spring to the Spring Height described below.  In catalogs this would be called the "open force" or "open pressure". 
Spring Height, in 
The height of the valve spring when compressed approximately as much as at maximum valve lift.  This would be a height somewhat before coil bind, with still .050" or more between coils.  A common lift quoted in cam catalogs is the "open height". 
The actual height is not critical as long as it is before coil bind occurs.  However, the closer this lift is to the valve's max lift height or open height, the more likely to correct for any "non-linearity" in the spring. 
2.9.20 Calc Belt Ratio 
Is the Belt Ratio for either a Roots or Centrifugal supercharger calculated from the following specs.  Belt Ratio is defined on page 52 and page 56 under Roots Supercharger and Centrifugal Supercharger specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
S/C Pulley Diameter, in 
The diameter of the supercharger pulley measured in inches.  This can also be the number of cogs on this pulley if you are using a cogged belt.  Then you must also use # cogs for Crank Pulley Diameter, not inches. 
Crank Pulley Diameter, in 
The diameter of the crankshaft pulley which drives the supercharger measured in inches. This can also be the number of cogs on this pulley if you are using a cogged belt.  Then you must also use # cogs for S/C Pulley Diameter, not inches. 
2.9.21 Calc Island CFM 
Is the turbocharger compressor Island CFM calculated from the following specs.  Island CFM is defined on page 58 under Turbocharger specs. See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Occasionally, turbocharger compressor maps are given in units of mass flow like lb/min.  For these cases, use this calculation menu to convert mass flow to volume flow in CFM. 
Flow at Peak Eff, lb/min 
The mass flow which gives peak thermal efficiency, in the middle of the efficiency "island".  If mass flow is given in Kg/min, multiply by 2.2 to obtain pounds per minute. 
Map Temperature, deg R 
Compressor maps usually give the standard weather conditions (temperature and pressure) to which the data is corrected.  Enter this standard temperature here, converted to degrees Rankine. 
If this temperature is in  First Multiply by  Then Add  
Degrees F  1  460  
Degrees C  1.8  492  
Degrees K             1.8  0  
To obtain Degrees Rankine.  

If no temperature is given on the map, enter 520 degrees. 
Map Barometer, “Hg 
Compressor maps usually give the standard weather conditions (temperature and pressure) to which the data is corrected.  Enter this standard barometric pressure here, converted to inches of Mercury. 
If this pressure is in:  Multiply by:  
PSI  2.036  
Bar  29.52  
mm Hg  .03937  
To obtain '' Hg.  

If no barometric pressure is given on the map, enter 29.92 
2.9.22 Calc Turbine Nozzle Dia, in 
Is the turbocharger Turbine Nozzle Dia calculated from the following specs in inches. Turbine Nozzle Dia is defined on page 60 under Turbocharger specs. See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 

Est from Comp CFM 
If you have no measurements or specs for the turbocharger turbine, choose Yes.  Then enter the Compressor Island CFM that you will use as Island CFM in the Turbocharger Specs as the CFM @ Peak Eff in this calculation menu. 
If you do have turbine specs or dimensions, choose No and adjust the Turbine Specs that follow. 
CFM @ Peak Eff 
Enter the Island CFM for the compressor as listed in the Turbocharger Specs.  If you chose No for Est from Comp. CFM, this spec is disabled and this value is ignored in the calculation. 
Turbine Specs 
Spec to Use 
This combo box lets you choose the type of dimensions you have for the exhaust turbine: 
• 
A/R Ratio 

• 
Area 


You choice here will determine which specs in this section of the menu are enabled 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Turbine A/R 
The turbine housing's A/R ratio.  A/R ratio is illustrated in Figure 2.51. 
If you  chose Area for Spec to Use, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
Housing Radius, in 
The radius of the turbine housing as pictured in Figure 2.51, in inches. 
If you  chose Area for Spec to Use, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
Nozzle Area, sq in 
If you know the turbine nozzle flow area, enter it here in square inches.  If you have area in sq cm, multiply by .155 to obtain square inches. 
If you  chose A/R for Spec to Use, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
2.9.23 Notes on Barometric Pressure & Elevation 
This menu simply displays the relationship between barometric pressure and elevation specifications, as explained in Section 2.8.1, page 63 and 64. Refer to that page for further details.  Click on OK or press the <space bar> to return to the Calculation Conditions menu with no change to either Barometric Pressure or Elevation 
2.9.24 Calc Dew Point, deg F 
Is the Dew Point, Deg F calculated from the following specs.  Dew Point, Deg F is defined on page 64 under Calculation Conditions specs.  See page 97 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Know Relative Humidity 
Your choice here will determine which specs are enabled in this menu. 
Outside Air Temp, deg F 
Is the outside air temperature when the relative humidity measurement was made.  For example, if the weather service or weather report gives a relative humidity of 56 % and a temperature of 68 degrees, use 68 for the Outside Air Temp.  If you chose No for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 2 Definitions 
Outside Rel Humidity, % 
Is the air's relative humidity as reported by a weather service or measured by humidity instruments.  If you chose No for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
Dry Bulb Temp, deg F 
Is the temperature of the dry bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  This is also the temperature of any thermometer mounted in the shade when the Wet Bulb Temp reading is taken.  The Dry Bulb Temp must not be less than the Wet Bulb Temp.  If you chose Yes for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
Wet Bulb, deg F 
Is the temperature of the wet bulb thermometer on the psychrometer in degrees F.  The wet bulb has a "wick" or cloth covering the bulb which is moistened with water.  The dryer the air, the greater the difference between the wet and dry bulb readings.  Relative humidity or dew point can be manually read off a Psychometric chart from these two readings.  This calculation replaces reading the chart. The Wet Bulb Temp must be less than the Dry Bulb Temp. If you chose Yes for Know Relative Humidity, this spec is disabled and its value is ignored in the calculation. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Chapter 3 Output 
The Engine Analyzer Pro provides several ways to view and output the test results, including: 
• 
Tabular, calculated results displayed on the screen 

• 
Tuning Pressures screen to watch port pressures and intake & exhaust flow while calculations are taking place 

• 
Analysis Report giving tips, warning of safety issues, etc. 

• 
ASCII files for importing results to other software packages 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output or reports or graphs 

• 
Data Libraries for recording either test results or sets of engine specs for later use 

• 
See-Engine screen to actual watch the piston and valves move and interact, tuning pressures, air flow, etc. 


All these topics will be covered in this chapter. Figure 3.1 shows how to reach all these various features, except Tuning Pressures. This option must be selected while the calculations are taking place by clicking on the See Tuning Pressures button in the Progress Indicator box.. 
The Output features have been expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Figure 3.1 Various Output Options from the Test Results Screen  
Menu bar with output options: Back to Main Menu, Make Graphs, Print Results, Display Help, Save or Open Files of Test Results, Analyze results (program gives advice based on user requirements and current results), See Engine piston/valves/valve dynamics/air flows, etc. 
Command buttons: Make Graphs, Print Results, Display or Edit Engine and Component Comments, Display Notes (safety issues, possible problems, etc.) about current test results 
Summary of Notes (safety issues, possible problems, etc.) 


Name of current Engine File 
Name of current Test File 
Performance Summary 
RPM Data. Click on any cell in the grid for a Help definition of that particular piece of data. 
Slide bar. Click and drag button to display all RPM test results. 


Special Calculations. Results which do not change with RPM. Click on any result for a Help definition of that particular piece of data. 
Slide bar. Click and drag button to display all Special Calculation test results. 
Horizontal slide bar. Click and drag to display all RPM Data if # RPMs is greater than 12. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
3.1 Tuning Pressures 
The Tuning  Pressures screen displays intake and exhaust port pressures and velocities.  This screen is very useful for analyzing intake and exhaust tuning dynamics.  Many users may not feel comfortable reading graphs.  Therefore, the Pro also provides a small engine diagram to help give a feel for what the graphs mean.  Main items of this screen are explained in Figure 3.2. 
See Appendix 5:  Watching Tuning Pressure and Flow for tips on interpreting these graphs. 

Figure 3.2 Explanation of Tuning Pressures Screen 
Exhaust port pressure, graphed with thick dark red line.  When this line is below cylinder 
pressure, exhaust flows out of the cylinder. Cylinder pressure graphed with a thick light gray line. 
Intake port pressure, graphed with a thick green line. When this line is 
above cylinder pressure, fresh air and fuel flows into the cylinder. Cylinder Events of TDC and BDC (top and botton dead center. graphed in black dotted lines for reference. 
Barometric pressure graphed with a blue dotted line. Pressures graphed below this line indicate a vacuum. 
Engine diagram shows approximate piston and valve positions, intake and exhaust flows (green and dark red arrows) and reverse flow (bright red arrows), spark event, RPM and crank position in degrees. 

Click to return to normal Progress Indicator, where calculations run about 30% faster. 

Click to print this screen. You must have selected the Enable Print option. 
Click to cancel (abort) calculations. 
Intake runner velocity (graphed with a thick green line), in feet/sec. When this line goes below 0, it indicates intake reversion (reverse flow). 
Exhaust runner velocity (graphed with a thick dark red line), in feet/sec. When this line goes below 0, it indicates reverse exhaust flow (exhaust flowing back into the cylinder). 
Valve Events of EO, EC, IO and IC (exhaust opening, exhaust closing, intake opening and intake closing at .003” lift) graphed in color coded, dotted lines for reference 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Options for Tuning Pressures 
Click on the  Options item in the menu line and the list of options shown in Figure 3.3 is displayed. 
Run Continuously Pause Each Cycle Pause Step 
Your selection determines if the program waits for your action before continuing with the calculations.  Run Continuously means the program does not stop.  Pause Each Cycle means the program will stop at the end of 2 revs (one complete graph is drawn).  Pause Each Step means the program stops every 4 degrees.  Pausing is the most convenient way to print this graph at a particular point of completion. 
When the program stops, a small menu appears with 3 choices: 
• 
Continue 

• 
Print (if the Enable Printing options has been chosen) 

• 
Run Continuously (which turns off pausing) 



Normal Speed Slower Speed Slowest Speed 
Changes the speed of the calculations and updating rate on this screen.  Slower speeds make it easier to analyze particular portions of this graph. 
Show Velocity and Pressure Show Pressure Only Show Velocity Only 
These options let you enlarge one section of this screen so items can be seen in greater detail.  Show Velocity and Pressure is the option displayed in Figure 3.2. 
Show Entire Cycle Show Overlap Only 
These options let you enlarge the overlap area of these graphs so items can be seen in greater detail.  Overlap is the critical portion of the cycle as far and intake and exhaust tuning is concerned. This is where reversion and short-circuiting can occur. (Intake closing is also critical as far as intake tuning alone is concerned.)  Show Entire Cycle is the option displayed in Figure 3.2. 
Enable Printing (slower/more flicker) Disable Printing 
These options let you select to be able to print these Tuning Pressure graphs or not.  If you select to Disable Printing, the calculations are a little faster and there is some less flicker in the Engine Diagram graphic. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Standard Pressure Scale (60 PSI) Higher Pressure Scale (120 PSI) 
This option lets you graph port pressures either on a 0 to 60 PSI scale to show greater detail, or a 0-120 PSI scale.  The 0-120 PSI scale is useful for graphing supercharged or turbocharged engines, where port pressures can go well over 60 PSI. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
3.2 Analysis Reports 
When calculated performance results are displayed on the screen, you can obtain the Analysis Options menu by clicking on Analyze in the menu bar.  See Figure 3.4A. 
The Analysis report consists of 2-5 pages of suggestions for improving performance, safety warnings, etc. concerning the performance results calculated. See Figure 3.4B for a screen report. 

IMPORTANT:  The ENGINE ANALYZER can NOT anticipate all UNSAFE and poor  performing situations.  Do NOT rely only on the Analysis report to point out problems and SAFETY HAZARDS.  You must use your own judgment and expert advice by experienced engine builders and the manufacturer of the engine components.  
Short Form 
Check this Option box if you feel very comfortable with running the Engine Analyzer Pro and understanding its output.  If you do not check this option you will obtain the full report which gives additional tips on changing the Engine Analyzer Pro inputs to obtain the desired performance level. 
Desired HP Peak RPM 
Enter the RPM where you would like this engine's HP to peak.  The Analysis report will give suggestions for specifications to produce good performance at this RPM. 
Application 
Click this combo box for the following choices: 
• 
Mild Street An engine  driven primarily on the street.  It must  idle well, run a low RPM, and have  a full exhaust system. 

• 
Street/Strip An engine designed for occasional racing but must be durable and driven on the street. 

• 
Full Race An engine designed for racing only.  Since there are several classes of racing, from circle  track "claimer" and "restricted" classes to Formula 1, the Analysis report does not get      extremely specific. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
3.3 ASCII Data Files 
The ASCII Data Files Features have been greatly expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
You may want to use the results from the Engine Analyzer Pro in other software packages.  This could be for additional plot capabilities, statistical analysis, data basing, etc.  Click on File, then select the Save Current Test Results  to ASCII File to write the results to an ASCII file with a name of your choosing.  This command is possible any time tabular, calculated results are displayed on the screen. 
You can only save the results for the results currently displayed on the Test Results screen.  If you want to write an ASCII file of test results you have previously run and saved, you must retrieve them first.  This is done by clicking on File at the Test Results screen, then choose one of the “Pick” commands to retrieve these results so they are the Current Test results. 
Performance data are the calculated results which appear on the screen, consisting of the RPM, Brk Tq, Brake HP, etc.  Cycle data consists of the most recent Cycle plot data which was saved for this performance calculation.  Examples of Cycle Data would be cylinder pressure and cylinder temperature versus crank degrees. 
Figure 3.5 Options Menu for Writing ASCII Files 
The preview shows what the upper left corner of the ASCII file will look like based on the options checked. 
Click on the RPM for writing Cycle Data. Only 1 RPM’s data written per ASCII file. This column is empty and not used for RPM data. 
When ready (preview looks like you want the file format to look), click on OK. You will be presented with the standard Windows file saving menu to save the ASCII file to most any name, path, directory or drive. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
3.4 Graphs 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph button or the Graph name in the menu bar as shown in Figure 3.1.  Figure 3.6 shows a typical graph and a descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 
The Graphing Features have been greatly expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Figure 3.6 Basic Graph Screen Items Command buttons. Some commands can only be done through these buttons, some of these 



Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 
Vertical Y axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily changed as described in this section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
There are 2 basic types of test data which can be graphed: 
• 
RPM Data like Brk Torque, Brake HP, etc. vs RPM. 

• 
Cycle Data like cylinder pressure, intake runner flow velocity, intake valve flow area, etc. vs either crank degrees, time or cylinder volume 


There are 2 basic types of graphs: 
• 
Single Data graphs, where only 1 type of data is graphed.  For example, this would be where Brake HP from 1 or several tests is graphed. 

• 
Mixed Data graphs, where more than 1 type of data is graphed.  For example, this would be where Brk Torque, Brake HP and Fuel Flow are graphed from 1 or several tests. 


There are 3 basic types of tests which can be graphed: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results whose RPM data is displayed when at the Test Results screen.  These can be for the test results just calculated, or for a test retrieved at the test results screen using the File menu command. 

• 
Last test results. These are the test results from the previous calculation.  By comparing the current calculated results to the last results, you can easily watch how each engine modification has effected performance.  This is similar to the typical graph comparisons or version 1.1 and 1.2 or Engine Analyzer Pro. 

• 
Test results from the Common List. The Common List is also the List of Commonly Used Test Files.  This is a list of specially selected saved test results files, ones which may be of special interest or significance. 


Note that you can not graph the data from saved test results file until that file has been added to the Common List.  This is discussed later in this section. 
RPM Data vs Cycle Data 
You can switch between RPM Data and Cycle Data 2 basic ways as shown in Figure 3.7. 
Figure 3.7 Switching between RPM Data and Cycle Data 

Click on Format, then either Single Data Graphs or Mixed Data Graphs, then you will have a choice between RPM or Cycle Graphs as shown here. 
Under the Format menu are buttons for switching between RPM and Cycle Data. Click on the left button shown to do Cycle Data, the right button switches to RPM data. 

Click on the “RPM-cyc” menu item. Whichever data type “RPM” or “CYC” is given in upper case letters is the data type currently being used. In this case shown, clicking on “RPM-cyc” will switch the graph from the current RPM data type to the Cycle data type. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
If you have selected Cycle Data, the program also needs to know for which RPM do you want the data graphed.  Figure 3.8 shows how this is done. Figure 3.9 shows how to make Multi-RPM graphs.  These are graphs where Cycle data from 2 or more RPMs from the current test are graphed for comparison.  This can only be done if the current test is the only test being graphed (“last” and “list” must be turned off as discussed in a couple of pages). 
Figure 3.8 Picking the RPMs for Graphing Cycle Data 
You must first select Cycle data by clicking on “rpm-CYC” 
Click on PicRPM to display the Pick RPM for Graph menu. This menu option is enabled only when Cycle Data has been selected (rpm-CYC is the heading.) 
If you have selected to graph data from the last test also (LAST is printed in upper case in the menu bar), you can also select the RPM for its data to graph. 
Click on the one RPM for 
graphing Cycle data from the 
current test 

Figure 3.9 Multi-RPM Cycle Graphs “Last” and “list” must be turned off (printed in 
Click on PicRPM to display the Pick RPM for Graph menu. 
For Multi-RPM graphs, click on as many of these RPMs as you wish and data for each will be graphed. 
This screen shows a Multi-RPM Graph of a Single Data type, but Multi-RPM Graphs can also be made of Mixed Data types. 
Click on Yes for the Multi-RPM Graph option. This option will be enabled only if “list” and “last” are turned off (printed in lower case). 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Mixed Data Graph vs Single Data Graph 
Figure 3.10 shows how to switch between these graph types.  Figure 3.11 shows an example of a Single Data Graph of Cycle Data (intake port pressure)  with explanations of some Single Graph features.  Figure 3.12 explains the menu for producing Mixed Data graphs. 

Figure 3.10 Switching between Mixed Data Graph and Single Data Graph Types 
Click on Format, then either Single Data Graphs or Mixed Data Graphs, then you will have a choice between RPM or Cycle Graphs as shown here. 
Click on the MIXED or SINGLE menu items.  Whichever graph type is given in upper case letters is the graph type currently being used.  In this case shown, MIXED is the graph type currently being used (torque and HP vs RPM). 

Hidden under the Format menu are 2 buttons shown below. Click on the left button for Mixed Data Graphs and on the right one for Single Data Graphs. 
Figure 3.11 Cycle Data Shown in Single Data Graph 
Click on Data Type you want graphed, then click on OK (or simply double click on Data Type). 
Click and drag the slide bar button to display all the data types. 
For Cycle Data graphs, choose what you want graphed on the X Axis. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.12 Menu of Mixed Data Options 



Click here to use Saved (pre-programmed) Graph Patterns as explained in Figure 3.11. 
Click on this button to enable options on the right side of this menu. These options let you specify and quickly change the manner in which you can plot from 1 to 4 different types of data on 1 graph. 
Click on this combo box to pick the first type of data to include in the graph, or select “No Graph” to eliminate this particular graph line. These choices change depending on if you are making RPM or Cycle graphs. 
Click on this combo box to pick the multiplier for the first graph line. A multiplier lets data of very different values appear with equal detail on the same graph. Note that the multiplier for Brk Tq and HP are both 1 since Brk Tq and Brake HP are usually about the same value (typically if torque is about 50, HP is from 30 to 100 HP, if torque is 500 , HP is from 300 to 1000.) 
Note that the multiplier for BSFC is 1000, or that you would have to multiply BSFC (typically in the ragnge of .4 to .7) by 1000 to get a number approximately of the same magnitude as torque and HP. 
If you are making Cycle Data graphs, you can pick the units for the X axis, either Crank Degrees (used the most often) or time in seconds or cylinder volume (primarily for pressure-volume diagrams). 
The Guess at Multipliers has not yet been activated at the time of printing this manual. When activated it will have the program pick the multipliers so you don’t have to. 
Click here and the program will save this particular set of Data Types, Multipliers (and if Cycle Data, X Axis Data Type) under a name you will supply. This Saved Graph Pattern will appear in the list on the left side of this menu as shown in Figure 3.13. 
Click here to produce the plot based on the current specs in the New Graph Pattern section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.13 Menu of Mixed Data Options for Graph Patterns 

The left side of this menu is for picking pre-programmed graph patterns (either loaded at the factory or that you have created). Click on the Use Saved Graph Pattern button to enable these options. 
A Graph Pattern consists of a set of all specs listed under the Use New Graph Pattern button 
This section gives a summary of the graph pattern selected (highlighted) from the list below it. 
Click on this button to delete the pre­programmed graph pattern which is currently selected (highlighted). 
Click on the name of a particular pre­programmed graph pattern here. 
Click on OK to make the graph based on the Saved Graph Patten chosen. 
Current Test Results, Last Test Results and Test Results from the Common List 
Here’s the definitions as given earlier: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results whose RPM data is displayed when at the Test Results screen.  These can be for the test results just calculated, or for a test retrieved at the test results screen using the File menu command. 

• 
Last test results. These are the test results from the previous calculation.  By comparing the current calculated results to the last results, you can easily watch how each engine modification has effected performance.  This is similar to the typical graph comparisons or version 1.1 and 1.2 of Engine Analyzer Pro. 

• 
Test results from the Common List. The Common List is also the List of Commonly Used Test Files.  This is a list of specially selected saved test results files, ones which may be of special interest or significance. 


Note that you can not graph the data from saved test results file until that file has been added to the Common List.  This is discussed later in this section. 
The first 2 types are relatively self explanatory, the last of Test Results from Common List is explained in more detail in this section. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 



Figure 3.14 Picking Test Results to Graph Clicking on the Common List button is the same as clicking on the LIST menu command. Click on File, then on the Pick Test(s) from Common List.  The other 3 options before Pick Test(s) from Common List let you manipulate files of Saved Test Results.  These are explained in Section 3.6, Libraries. 
Click on LIST to display the Common List or List of Commonly Used Files. This automatically turns off LAST if the graph had included the last calculated results.  LIST is now printed in upper case and last is printed in lower case. 
Click on LAST to have the graph include the last calculated results. This automatically turns off LIST if the graph had included the files from the Common List. LAST is now printed in upper case and list is printed in lower case. 
Note: Click on LAST or LIST, whichever is upper case to turn that data off and only the current results will be graphed. 
Figure 3.15 Common List Click on the Saved Test Results to highlight it to include it in the graph. Click again on a highlighted test to “de­select” it. Then click on OK to make the graph. 
The RPMs given with the Saved Test Results name is the RPM for the Cycle Data from this test which will be graphed. This RPM is not used if you are doing RPM graphs. If this is not the RPM you want to graph, you must click on File, then Add Saved Test to Common List, then add this file to the list again, this time picking the RPM you want to graph. A Test Results File can be listed more than once in the Common List. 
Click on OK to make the graph. 
Click here to omit graphing files from this list.  This will 
produce a graph of only the current results. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 


These are discussed in this next section. 
Printing 
Figure 3.16 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  Figure 3.17 shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup. 
Figure 3.16 Printing Graphs 
Click on File to display the two print menu options 
Click here to print the graph. 
Click here change the printer or printer driver, page orientation, etc. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places.  See Figure 3.18 for explaining the use of the cursor. 
Figure 3.18 Cursor Features and Commands 
Cursor line, usually pink or Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or right.  Hold down the green, depending on <shift key> while clicking these buttons and the cursor moves farther.  background color. You can enable the cursor by clicking on View, then Turn Cursor On. 


The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 
Important: Note that in this graph BSFC was graphed after being multiplied by 1000. This is so it would show up on a graph of torque and HP. However, the value displayed here is the actual BSFC value of .396 to .401. 


The X value of the cursor is shown here, in this case the RPM of 6500. 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph line at a data point. This also provides a quick way to move the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Changing titles and legend names 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure 3.19 which will allow you to do this. 
Figure 3.19 Menu to Edit Title and Legend 
This is the list of Standard names the program uses unless you click on the Use New Titles button below. Select (click on) a Standard name you want to change.  The Standard Name appears in the edit box, along with the current New name if there is one. Once you have selected a name from this list (that row will be highlighted) it is easier to use the up and down arrow keys to select the next item to edit than clicking the item with the mouse. 
This is the list of New names the program will use if you click on Use New Titles. If a title in the List of New Names is blank, the program will use the Standard name. 
Standard name from row selected. 
New name for you to edit. Other options include clicking on the Copy Std Name to New or Blank Out New Name buttons. 


Click here to close this menu and use the New names you have entered. Where New names have been left blank, the Standard name will be used. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph.  The Pro has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures 3.20 and 3.21. 

Figure 3.21 Menu to Specify Graph Axes Scales 
This menu can be obtained 2 ways. 
You can click on View in the menu bar 
then Specify Scales (axes), or click on 
the Set Scales button, the right most 
button on the screen. 

The current scale limits are loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. 
Click on OK to have the graph redrawn to these new scale limits . 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Cycle Plot Parameters: 
This section gives a brief description of all the possible cycle plots.  As shown, some cycle plots are independent of RPM. Therefore, it does not matter what RPM you pick when plotting this cycle data. 
Cyl Pres  Cylinder pressure in PSI absolute or PSIA.  
Cyl Temp  Cylinder temperature in °F.  
In Port Vel  The actual velocity of the charge in the intake port in feet per second.  (This is not the velocity based on  incompressible flow equations:  piston speed x piston area / int runner area).  
Ex Port Vel  The actual velocity of the charge in the exhaust port in feet per second.  (This is not the velocity based on  incompressible flow equations:  piston speed x piston area / exh runner area).  
In Vlv Lift  The theoretical position of the valve as directed by the cam profile in inches (cam lift x rocker arm ratio -    valve lash).  
In Cam Vel  The velocity of the theoretical tappet position with respect to crank degrees discounting any valve train  dynamics (bending or tossing).  The units are inches per cam degree x 1000.  
In Cam Accl  The acceleration of the theoretical tappet position with respect to crank degrees discounting any valve train  dynamics (bending or tossing).  The units are inches per cam degree per crank degree x 1000.  
Act IVLift  The actual position of the valve as directed by the cam profile but also accounting for valve train dynamics    (bending and "tossing").  
In Flow Ar  The effective intake valve opening in square inches based on Act IVLift.  Effective valve opening is calculated by:   In FlowAr = Geometric Area x Flow Coef  
Where Geometric Area and Flow Coef are changing at each lift point.  For example, if the valve  opening area is 1.5 square inches at .35" of valve lift, and the flow coefficient at .35" is .5, the In  Flow Ar is .75 square inches at .35" valve lift.  
In Pshrd F  The theoretical pushrod force in pounds.  This value should correlate to data from strain gauged push rods.  
Ex Vlv Lift  See In Vlv Lift above.  
Ex Cam Vel  See In Cam Vel above.  
Ex Cam Accl  See In Cam Accl above.  
Act EVLift  See Act IVLift above.  
Ex Flow Ar     See In Flow Ar above.  
Ex Pshrd F  See In Pshrd F above.  
InPort Pres  Pressure in the intake port next to the valve in PSI absolute.  
Ex Port Pres  Pressure in the exhaust port next to the valve in PSI absolute.  
Pstn Vel  Piston velocity in feet per minute.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Pstn Gs  Piston acceleration in Gs.  
Pstn Thrst  Piston thrust force on the side of the cylinder wall from cylinder pressure in pounds, neglecting piston and  connecting rod mass and inertia effects.  
Carb Signal  The instantaneous fuel metering signal produces by the carburetor venturi in '' water.    
Note:  Due to a special case in the calculations, if you are running a draw through supercharger or  turbocharger, this value will be plotted as 0.  Its actual value for this case is not 0.  
Pstn Pos  The piston position from TDC in inches.  At TDC (360 and 720 degrees), this will be 0; at BDC (180 and  540 degrees), this will be the piston stroke.  
Instnns Tq  The instantaneous torque produced from 1 cylinder of the engine in ft lbs.   
Heat Trnsfr  The instantaneous rate of heat loss from the combustion gases to the cylinder head, cylinder walls and piston  top in BTU/sec.  Multiply this value by .71 to obtain the instantaneous HP loss.  
Cyl Vol  The instantaneous cylinder volume in cubic inches.  When the piston is at TDC (360 and 720 degrees), this is the clearance volume.  When the piston is at BDC (180 and 540 degrees), this is the clearance volume plus    the swept volume.  

Enterprise Edition adds new Valve Spring details.  See Appendix 13. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 


3.5 Printer Output 
The Graphing Features have been greatly expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro can print the tabular test results for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer icon.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.22 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the top for boxes.  All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 
Figure 3.22 Printer Command and Menu of Printer Output Options This options lets you choose the printer or printer driver being used by Windows and also page orientation. 
Click on Print or thePrinter button for the Printout Options menu shown to the right. 



Include Engine Specs 
Select this options if you want all the current Short Block specs, cylinder Head(s) specs, etc printed with the results.  This will add 2-4 pages to the printed report. 
Include Engine Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the complete engine file and the Short Block specs, cylinder Head(s) specs, etc printed with the results. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular report you send to the printer.  These "report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like modifications, engine results, etc. 
Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment 
If you are using a dot matrix printer, the standard printout may have printed text extending outside the borders.  Select this option and the borders and indent spacing are adjusted for these situations. 
Other Printout Types 
Print Blank Worksheet 
Click on this button to produce a list of major engine specs with blank lines next to them.  These "worksheets" are handy for gathering engine specs when creating new engines with the Pro.   
Print Help Definitions 
Click on this button  to produce a list of output parameters with a 1 line definition.  These definitions are the same as when you click on sections of the test results and help is displayed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
3.6 Data Libraries 
The Data Library Features have been greatly expanded in later versions, especially for using simplified Standard Engine Analyzer Example component files.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro allows you to save sets of engine specifications to the Engine Library, and sets of component specs (Short Blocks, cylinder Head(s), etc) in separate Component Libraries.  In addition , you can save calculated test results for analysis or comparison in the future.  Test  Files also contain the engine (and component) specs which produced the test results. 
The organization of Data Libraries is illustrated in Figure 3.23. 

As shown in Figure 3.23, complete Engine Files are stored in the TOTENG directory, and Component Files are stored in separate component directories.  All Test Files are stored in separate directories under the SAVEDDTA directory.  The number of Test Files can grow  quite large.  When you want to compare the current test results with a particular saved Test File, it is time consuming to have to sort through the various directories and test files to find it.  That is why there is the Common List, or List of Commonly Used Test Files.  Here you can store a small number of Test Files for easy recall. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Example of Using and Saving Specs and Test Data 
For example, say you are working on a small block 302 Ford.  You want to switch to TFS heads, EFI intake and new cam with good street performance. 
• 
Enter all the specs for the carbureted 302 Ford.  Get in the habit to also change all the comments in the component menus and the main menu to match  the actual specs you’ve entered.  This will save a lot of confusion in the future if you save these specs and retrieve them in the future.  See Figure 3.24. 

• 
If any of the components are something you think you may use again in the future, say cylinder head with the flow curves, you will want to save these component specs.  In the Cylinder Head(s) menu click on the Save to Library button.  When asked if you want to Save Specs to Same File Name, answer No.  Then give the program a new name for these Head Specs, say PROD-302.  See Figure 3.24.  Note that the program always presents this menu with the current file name loaded, in this case PROD-GT40.  This allows you to make minor modifications to it to create the new file name. 

• 
Definitely save all the engine specs at the Main Menu by clicking on the Save button.  This will save an Engine File of all specs. When asked if you want to Save Specs to Same File Name, answer No.  Then give the program a new name for this complete Engine File, say BASE-302.  See Figure 3.24 and 3.25. 

• 
Calculate performance to obtain the Baseline test results.  Save these results by clicking on File, then Save Current Results to Disk.  If this is going to be a big project, you may want to create a separate directory for saving the Test File.  If so, click on the Add Directory button and enter an appropriate name, say JOES-302.  Then select this directory and enter a New Test Name as shown in Figure 3.26.  Enter a name like BASECARB. 

• 
Since the Baseline Performance is a test file you will refer to often for graph comparisons, save this new Test File name to the Common List.  Back at the Test Results screen, click on File and then Add Saved Test to Common List..  Here you can access all directories under SAVEDDTA and all files in each directory.  Find and highlight the directory you just created, JOES-302. Then find the BASECARB file, click on it to highlight it and then click on the Add to List and Select for Graphing button.  It will appear both in the common list and be highlighted (selected).  You may want to delete some of the existing files from the Common List (they are still saved as a Test File), or at least de-select files which do not relate to the 302 Ford you are working on. 

• 
Now return to the Main Menu by pressing the <Esc> key or clicking on Back.  Make changes to the specs to match the new heads, new intake, etc. Calculate performance and compare the test results to the Baseline you’ve saved in the Common List.  You should also save Test Files of results for combinations which look promising, and add these files to the Common List. This will provide a quick list of various results for easy graph comparisons. (These results may not warrant saving the components or engine specs as Component or Engine files, but these specs are saved with the Test File anyway should they become important in the future.) 

• 
For components which are set (like stock TFS heads) and you want to keep the specs for future reference or for use on other engines, save them as shown earlier.  At important intermediate steps, you may also want to save the engine specs as an Engine File. You will definitely want to save your final design as a complete engine file.  Again, be sure to update all engine and component comments to be accurate with the current specs. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
3.24 Saving Component Files 
Select No and the program will ask you for a New Component Name in the menu shown to the right. 
Click on Yes and Click here to startthe program will the process ofupdate the current saving the currentfile name with component specs ascurrent specs. 
a a component file. 

Current Component File Name Be sure to update comments in addition to the specs. These comments are very useful should you retrieve this component file in the future. 
The program presents the current file name for editting. Change it to most any name for the component file. The program warns you if the file name already exists or there is a problem with the name. 

Click here and the current Engine Name will be entered as the Component name. 

Figure 3.25 Saving a Complete Engine File Click on File, then Save (saves specs to 
current Engine name) or Save As (asks for 
new Engine Name.)
Click on Save button is same as clicking on File and then Save As. The process then matches saving a Component File as shown in Figure 3.24, except it will show you all the Component File names and comments, should you want to change something before saving the Engine File. 
Current Engine File Name 
Update the Engine Comments to match the current engine design. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 

Figure 3.26 Saving Test Files 
The first option lets you save the current Test Results (and the engine specs which produced those results) to a Test File on disk. 
This option lets you add a Test File which has been saved to the Common List. See Figure 3.27. 
After Clicking File and Saving Current Test Results to Disk, this menu appears. Several options (buttons) are disabled, unless you would have chosen File and then Move/Delete Saved Tests. 
This menu appears after you click on the Add Directory button. Enter most any name of 8 letters, no periods. This name will be added to the list of directories under SAVEDDTA. See the figure below. 


After adding the new directory, click on it to tell the program that is where you want to store these new test results. 
Enter any comments to better describe this test. These comments will be shown in a preview when you retrieve this test in the future. 
Enter a name for the test results file.  You can also click on a file name in the list below (shown empty here). That name will appear in this box. You can use this name or modify it slightly for the name of the Test Results file. Then Click on the OK/Save Test button. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.27 Adding Saved Test Files to the Common List 
This screen appears when you click on File and then Add Saved Test to Common List. 
First select directory where file is Saved. All Test Files in this directory will appear in list of Tests to the left. 
Click on the Test File you want to add to the Common List. A preview of this Test appears above it. Notice that here is where the test comments appear to remind you of what this test was. 
Click on one of the Add buttons. Since this is a test we will surely want to graph with other tests of these 302 specs, click on the Add to List and Select for Graphing button. 
Click on this button and a new menu showing the Common List appears. Here you can 
Click here and the selected Test select which files to remove from the list.  However, they remain saved to disk.


After you select a test to add to the Common List, the program will ask which RPM’s Cycle Data should be graphed if Cycle Data is Graphed. Pick 1 RPM from this list, then click OK. 
For RPM graphs, like torque and HP vs RPM, data for all RPMs are graphed. 
If there are more than 1 RPM you want to graph Cycle Data for, then you must add this Test File again to the Common List and select a different RPM from this list. 

After picking an RPM for Cycle Data, the Test File appears in the Common List and is highlighted. Note that the directory, Cycle Data RPM and date are also listed with the file name. 
The test also appears here, as a selected test. These selected test from the common list are the ones graphed when you click on List in the Graph Screen. 
To de-select the 2 “buick/rudd” Test Files, click on them in this list. The will become “unhighlighted” and be removed from the list of Selected Tests. They remain in the Common List for quick recall should you need them. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.28 Retrieving an Engine File (retrieving a Component File is similar) 
Click on File, then Retrieve or the Retrieve button from the Main Menu to retrieve an Engine File from the Engine Library. Click on the Retrieve from Library button in the Component Specs menus to retrieve Component Files from the Component Libraries. 

This is the typical menu to 

retrieve either an Engine or 
Component File. 
Click on a file name and its name appears as the Chosen File and a preview of its specs and comments is given to the right. 
Click here and the current specs will be replaced with the Chosen File’s specs. The program will first ask if you want to save the current specs before they are replaced. 
Click here to permanently delete the file from disk. 

Figure 3.29 Retrieving a Test File for Tabular Display (not just graphing) 
Click on File and then on one of the Pick file options, depending on if 
Click on a directory and then a Test
you want to 
file from the list for that directory.  A
retrieve a 
summary or preview is given above.
standard test or a Chain test. 
Click here to retrieve this test file.  You will be then asked if you want to retrieve the Engine specs which produced these results. The Test Results will be shown in tabular form and this data will now be called the Current results. If you do retrieve the engine Click here to delete specs also, you can do special analysis like an Analysis Report the chosen Test or use the See Engine feature to watch actual engine operation. File from disk. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
3.7 See Engine 
A new feature for version 2.1 is the ability to watch the valves and piston interact throughout the cycle, while also watching the tuning pressures and flows.  This screen is useful for pointing out trends in piston to valve interference, valve toss and valve train bending, etc.  Figure 3.30 explains the major features of this screen.   
In order to enter this screen, you must have just calculated Test results or retrieved a saved test and retrieved the Engine File which produced those test results. 

Figure 3.30 See Engine Screen 
Exact crank angle shown here. Enter angle & screen is updated to that point. 
Enter these specs for accurate piston­to-valve clearance. These are saved with Engine file (not Head or Short Block file). Examples of some specs available by clicking on Options. 
Minimum piston-to-valve is displayed in red if clearance is less than .100”. Click on Help for more info. 
Valve Train Dynamics specs shown 
here. Click on Help for more info. 
Piston-to-valve clearance shown here.  It is very 
Click on Help for more info. 
Although valves are drawn in a typical “wedge” layout, the clearance calculated for hemi and 4 
angle is entered. This angle is be the largest angle between the bore axis and the valve axis.
continuously. Continous is useful For a safety factor, be sure not to overestimate 
to actually see trends with flows this angle.
and valve/piston motion. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.31 See-Engine Options Menu Determines which valve is drawn with more emphasis. See explanation below. 

Determines if emphasis is shown with thick vs thin lines, or thin vs thin dotted lines. 
Lets you pick the RPM to analyze of the 
RPMs run for this particular test. 
Lets you change the graph which appears above the piston and valve graphic. 
Lets you pick an example of typical valve angles and Inches from Valve to Head Surface numbers. For best accuracy, you should use measurements from your own heads. 

The See Engine Features have been greatly expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Chapter 4 Examples 
The examples in this section start off with the various engine files exactly as you received them with the Engine Analyzer Pro diskette.  For example, Example 4.1 uses the RSTR-SBCHEV engine file.  To obtain a copy of RSTR- SBCHEV:
   Click on either File (engine) then Load Engine from the Menu bar at the Main Menu. 
   Click on the Retrieve button at the Main Menu.  See Example 4.1. 
Each example becomes progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated.  
Most examples consist of 2 sections, the first section for all users and a second section "For Advanced Users".  These second sections show a more detailed analysis to illustrate the use of the Pro’s many features. 
The results shown in these examples may be somewhat different than what you obtain with your particular version of the program That is due to minor upgrades in the calculations in later versions. 
Please visit the Performance Trends website  (www.performancetrends.com) for additional information, including Demo Movie files which show how to use the program’s many features.  These are available by clicking on Support from the drop down menu at the top of most any page, then selecting Movie Demo Files.  See below. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.1 Installing Larger Carburetor And Intake Manifold 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Section 1.5, Example To Get You Going 

• 
Changing Intake System specs (Section 2.4) 

• 
Calculate Performance and evaluating Test results (Section 2.8) 

• 
Using Calculation Menus (Section 2.9) 

• 
Graphing results (Section 3.4) 


Example 4.1 will be fairly simple to get you started.  We will attempt to answer the question: 
What performance improvement can be expected from a 355 Chevy with 255 CFM 2 BBL (Holley 350) with Performer dual plane engine, by switching to a 400 CFM 2 BBL (Holley 500) with a Victor Jr single plane intake? 
This will be done by modifying the Intake System specs to simulate installing the larger carb with a single plane manifold.  We will then see the effect on Test Results, especially torque and HP. 
First, start the Engine Analyzer Pro program following the procedure in Section 1.4 by either: 
• 
Clicking on the Engine Analyzer Pro icon in the Perf. Trends program group. 

• 
Clicking on the EAP.EXE (EAP) program under the EAP directory (folder) under the PERFTRNS.PTI directory (folder) using File Manager (Windows Explorer).  (Terms in parentheses are for Windows 95.) 


You will be given the Engine Analyzer Pro’s Main Menu.  Notice at the top of the screen that the current Engine file is a SUPERSTOCK Buick V-6. 
To obtain the engine file RSTR-SBCHEV, click on the Retrieve button as shown in Figure 4.1. Retrieve the Engine file RSTR-SBCHEV as shown in Figure 4.2.  If you  have made any changes to the SUPERSTOCK engine file, the program will first ask you if you want to save these changes.  Answer No and you will be returned to the Main Menu with the RSTR-SBCHEV specs loaded into the program. The original SUPERSTOCK engine file will remain safely in the library for future use. (If you had wanted to save any recent changes to the original SUPERSTOCK specs, you could have answered Yes. The program would then ask if you want to save then to the same name, overwriting SUPERSTOCK with these changes or to save the changes under a new name.) 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Click on the different categories of engine specs or the Calculate Performance button on the Main Menu. Since we want to see the effect of installing a carb and manifold on this engine, we first need to get a "baseline" test. A "baseline" is a performance test before the modification.  Therefore, if you examine the contents of any component menus, leave all current values as they are. 
Click on the Calculate Performance button and you will now be shown the Calculation Conditions screen.  This screen gives the conditions for calculating performance: weather, fuel, RPMs to run, etc. For now, leave these values as they are. 
Proceed with the calculations clicking on the Calculate Performance button. 

Before calculations are started, basic checks are made of the input specs for unusual combinations.  The program points out that this carb looks quite small for this engine size and displays the warning: 
Total CFM Rating looks restrictive for this engine size  Continue with Calculations anyway? 
Since this is the carb we must run and the Total CFM Rating is accurate, click on Yes and the program will continue with the performance calculation. 
The program will display  the Calculation Progress indicator as shown in Figure 4.3, with the last approximate volumetric efficiency the program has calculated for each RPM.  This information shows you how far the calculations have progressed, and how stable the calculations are. If the volumetric efficiencies are "jumping" high, then low, then high again, a problem may be indicated.  For example, the RPM being calculated may be too low for stable running with a "lopey", high RPM cam. 
When the calculations are finished, the performance results will look like Figure 4.3.  In the upper left corner, note the Pk Tq (peak torque) of 363 ft lbs at 3000 RPM and Pk HP (peak hp) of 307 HP at 6000 RPM.  Write this down for comparison with results after installing the carburetor and manifold.  We will want to see how this changes with the new intake system. 
To obtain a torque and HP plot, click on the Graph button or Graph menu item.  The program will present a graph  similar to 
that shown in Figure 4.5.  There are 2 basic type of plots the Engine Analyzer Pro makes: 
• 
Performance data versus RPM 

• 
Cycle data versus crank degrees, seconds or cylinder volume 


If you do not see a graph or torque and HP vs RPM like Figure 4.5, then check to ensure  the selections match what is shown in the Figure 4.5. and 4.6. See Section 3.4 for more details.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.4 Baseline Results 
Click here to Graph Performance Summary 

Click on vertical scroll bar buttons and slide them up or down to display all results. 
If more than 12 RPMs were calculated, use the horizontal scroll bar button to display data for all the different RPMs. 
Figure 4.5 Graph of Baseline Torque and HP RPM-cyc should have RPM capitalized, indicating RPM Data is being graphed. If CYC is capitalized, click on this item to capitalize RPM and produce RPM 

Both list and last should be in lower case, meaning only the current data is being graphed. If either are capitalized, click on them to turn them off. 
MIXED should be capitalized to indicate 2 types of data are being graphed, torque and HP. If it is not, click on it to produce the Mixed Data menu of options shown in Figure 4.6. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.6 Mixed Data Graph Format Menu (displayed by clicking on MIXED in the  Graph Screen) Click on this button to enable Click on this the specs on the right side of button to enable this menu. options on the left side of this menu. 


If this list is enabled If these specs are (not dimmed to gray), enabled (not dimmed to choose the Torque gray), choose specs from and HP vs RPM pre-these combo boxed to programmed graph match those shown here. pattern. If you do not If you do not see these see these data types, data types, you are not you are not doing doing RPM data graphs. RPM data graphs. See Figure 4.5. See Figure 4.5. 


Now for the good part; lets install that carb and manifold.  Get back to the Main Menu by clicking on Back in the menu bar (or pressing <ESC>) at the graph screen (Figure 4.5), then clicking on Back (or pressing <ESC>) again at the tabular Test Results screen (Figure 4.4). 
When you return to the Main Menu, click on Intake System to obtain the Intake System menu as shown in Figure 4.7.  The values in Figure 4.7 show specs for the new 400 2 BBL carburetor and manifold. 
You will need to make 6  modifications to simulate installing this intake.   
• 
Click on the Total CFM Rating and type 400 over the current value of 255 CFM.  Note:  This particular Holley 500 2 BBL flowed 400 CFM on a flow bench at 20.5" water (1.5 "Hg, mercury) . If it had not been flowed, we should have assumed it flowed 500 CFM at 3 "Hg, the standard 2 barrel rating pressure.  We would need to convert this to CFM at 1.5" Hg which is what the program wants.  The conversion is made by multiplying the 2 BBL CFM by .71, or in this case 500 x .71 = 355 CFM.  See page 29. That would have been a more restrictive carb than the carb we actually installed.  The same is true of the Holley 350 2 BBL which should have only flowed 249 CFM but actually flowed 255 CFM. 

• 
Change the Manifold Type from Dual Plane-carb(s) to a Single Plane-carb(s) to identify the manifold being a lower rise single plane design, where all cylinders feed from a single plenum.  The Single Plane type (as opposed to the Tunnel Ram­carb(s)) indicates a manifold with lesser tuning effects due to a design somewhat compromised for good overall driveability, smaller plenum and more bends in the runners. 

• 
Calculate a new runner size for the larger ports in the new manifold by clicking on the Clc button for Runner Dia @ Head.  See Section 2.9.3. At the Calc Avg Diameter calculation menu, chose No for Know Runner CCs?.  Then enter the new manifold's runner dimensions, which measure 2.0" high by 1.2" wide.  The runners are primarily rectangular, so choose 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Rectangular for Runner Shape and you will obtain 1.75 for the new Calc Avg Diameter.  Use this value by clicking on the Use Calc Value button. 
• 
Enter a more appropriate runner flow coefficient for the "free flowing" single plane design.  Since we do not have flow bench data, the Clc button and calculation menu will be no help.  Therefore, refer to Table 2.7 in this manual and use a value of, say 2.5 which is in the middle  of the range for "street" single plane manifolds.  See page 26. 

• 
The single plane has shorter runners than the original dual plane, some about 6", some about 2".  Enter an average runner length of 4" for Runner Length, in.  (Remember, this is the length of the runner in the intake manifold only, not the head and manifold.) 

• 
Change Intake Heat to No Heat since the Victor Jr's runners are completely isolated from heat sources like coolant passages, exhaust crossover or the lifter valley. 


You should also get in the habit of changing comments when you make major changes, as shown in Figure 4.7.  Simply click on 
the comments box, delete out the old comments and type in the new description. 
With these modifications made, click on the OK button in the Intake System menu.  Then click on the Calculate Performance button and then Calculate Performance button in the Calculation Conditions menu, or just click on the Run/HP button at the top of the Main Menu 
Now estimated performance shows a peak torque of 415 ft lbs at 4000 RPM and 386 HP at 6000 RPM. As with most "restricted" engines, this shows an impressive power increase with a larger carb. (See "For Advanced Users" at end of this example.) 
To understand why the performance increased as it did, look at the estimated performance items Int Vac, In Tun Pres, and In Port Tmp.  This is done most easily with a graph.  Simply click on Single and select (double click) on these 3 data types one at a time.  For Int Vac, you will obtain a graph like Figure 4.10. 
As one would expect, intake vacuum dropped with the larger carb and single plane intake.  The 255 CFM carb produced 6.6" vacuum flowing 467 CFM where the 400 CFM carb produced only 3.4" vacuum while flowing a higher 578 CFM (at 7000). 
In Tun Pres for the longer runner Dual Plane intake with the 350 carb was higher at most RPMs.  Only at 7000 did the single plane Victor Jr finally show an advantage. This bears out a common trend.  Single plane intakes tune well at high RPM, dual planes can tune well at lower RPM. 
The Victor Jr's runners are isolated from heat sources, which keeps In Port Tmp (intake port temperature) lower than with the Performer intake.  In Port Tmp varies from 109 -71 degrees where the Performer (255 CFM carb) varies from 133-103 degrees.  That's 25 to 30 degrees cooler to keep the charge more dense. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.8 Performance with Holley 500 2 barrel and Victor Jr Single Plane  
Click on Graph button or Graph menu item to produce graph shown in Figure 4.9. 

Performance Summary shows huge increase in Peak and Average torque and HP. 
Click on slide bar to display more Special Calculations. Here is where the RPM for Peak Secondary Tuning is displayed. With the Dual Plane Performer intake it showed 2724 RPM. Here it shows “na” because there is no secondary tuning with this Single Plane intake on a V-8 engine. 
Slide Bar 

Figure 4.9 Comparison Graph of Baseline Performance (last) with New Intake (current) 
Be sure LAST is selected ( printed in upper case). If not, click on last to have the program graph the last calcuated performance (the baseline 350 2 barrel performance) with the current performance (500 2 barrel). 
Current performance (500 2 barrel) color codes given here. 
Last performance (350 2 barrel) color codes given here. 
Current performance (500 2 barrel) torque and HP shows huge increase in performance at all RPMs except 2500. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Under the General Engine Calculations, notice the Secondary Tuning RPM is 2724 RPM with the dual plane intake.  This tells you secondary tuning (low speed tuning) is present with 
Figure 4.10 Single Data Graphs, This Example of Int Vac
the dual plane intake.  The 
Click on SINGLE
Secondary Tuning RPM is marked “na” with the single plane intake, saying no 

A list of possible
secondary tuning is present 
data types is
with this intake.  See Appendix 
displayed. Click
3. 
on the Data Type to graph, then click
Higher RPM performance with 
OK, or simply 
the 400 CFM carb-single plane 
double click on
intake has increased for 2 main 
data type. Use the
reasons: lower flow restriction 
slide bar on the
producing less manifold 
right side to
vacuum, and a cooler intake 
display more data
charge. Very low speed 
types.
performance has dropped somewhat due to a loss of secondary tuning. 
Obtain a plot of the new data vs the old data by clicking on the Graph button or the Graph menu item.  You should obtain a graph similar to that in Figure 4.9.  If it does not contain the graph from the “Last” calculation (the 350 Holley performance), click on the “last” menu item at the right side of the menu bar. 
The plot shows the high RPM performance improvement more dramatically than just quoting peak HP numbers.  This modification showed a tremendous HP improvement over a broad RPM range. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Graph option allows you to create graphs of projected torque and HP vs RPM.  The Graph option let you quickly compare performance between modifications and understand why performance has changed. 

• 
The Projected Performance output allows you to estimate performance gains for various engine modifications. 

• 
The calculated results contain a great deal of information.  This data allows you to understand why performance changed as it did. These can also be easily graphed. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
For Advanced Users: 
Referring back to the results for this example, note the Primary Jet and Secondary Jet near the bottom of the estimated performance printouts.  This is the recommended primary and secondary jet sizes for this engine with these carburetor specs.  Since these carbs only had primary venturis, the Secondary Jet is blank in both cases.   
(If your program is also showing Primary Jet as blank, you must select the Yes option for  Fuel Calculations in the Intake System menu.  If your program is showing very large numbers like 70 or so, you must go the Preferences menu at the top of the Main Menu, and change  the Jet Recommendations to Jet Diameter, inches.  Though Holley Jet # is more useful for many users, this example discusses actual jet areas so jet diameters are required in inches.) 
A carburetor which is sized correctly for a certain engine should have approximately the same Primary Jet throughout the entire usable RPM range. You will notice that the program recommended .0774 at 3000 RPM which dropped to .0740 by 7000 RPM with the baseline 255 CFM carb. This need for a larger jet at low RPM is because the metering signal is weaker at low RPM and lower air flow.  It also means that if 1 jet size is selected, the A/F will be leaner at low RPM than at high RPM, or:   
              The A/F delivered goes in the opposite direction of Primary Jet or Secondary Jet recommended. 
For example, if you installed a .0774 jet, you would get 12.5 A/F at 3000, but it would be 9% too rich (11.5 A/F) at 7000 RPM. The equation squares the diameter because fuel flow is based on jet area and jet diameter. 
22 
.0774 = (1.046) = 1.09 x 100% = 109 % or 9% too rich .0740 
Repeat the steps in the first part of this 
Figure 4.11 Test Results for 500 2 Barrel Holley
example, this time paying close attention to the fuel metering effects.  Retrieve RSTR-SBCHEV from the 

Primary Jet diameter recommendartions
Engine Library and obtain baseline 
given here in inches.
performance. 
Now, when changing the 6 specs for the 400 CFM - single plane intake like done 
Click on slide bar and 
in the first part of this Example 4.1. 
slide down to display
Also change: 
Primary Jet diameter recommendations. 
• 
The size of the Primary Venturi Diameter to 1.375" for the larger venturis in the 400 CFM 2 barrel.  See Figure 4.13.  

• 
Assume the 400 CFM carb has a similar power valve, venturi CD and air bleed % as the 255 CFM carb.  Leave these 3 carb specs "as is". 


After calculating performance for the new intake, click on Graph, and select Single, then select Primary Jet to obtain a graph like Figure 4.12. As Table 4.1 shows, the 500 2 barrel shows a 23% variation in A/F from 3000 to 7000 RPM.  It also shows that the 500 2 barrel requires a much larger Main Jet. 
Finally, lets try a carb modification to reduce the change in recommended Primary Jet.  Lets increase the air bleed % to 80% and recalculate performance. See Figure 4.13.  You will notice you get the same performance data (Brk Tq, Brake HP, etc).  However, Primary Jet has changed significantly.  As shown in the Figure 4.12 you now need a much larger jet, well over .1000" diameter.  However, the recommended jet size only changes 6% from 2500 to 7000 RPM.  Theoretically, this carb setup on the 500 2 Barrel should give a more constant A/F throughout the RPM range than the 60% Air Bleed . 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Table 4.1 Summary of Primary Jet Recommendations 
Condition  Primary Jet at 3000  Primary Jet at 7000  % Area Change  A/F at 7000 *  
350 2 barrel (255 CFM)  .0774  .0740  9%  11.5  
500 2 barrel (400 CFM), 60% Air Bleed  .095  .0855  23%  10.2  
500 2 barrel (400 CFM), 80% Air Bleed  .0113  .1023  18%  10.6  

* Assuming the recommended Primary Jet @ 2500 was installed.  

Figure 4.13 Fuel Delivery Specs Menu for 500 2 Barrel with 80% Air Bleed 
Click on the See Specs button in the Fuel Delivery Calculations in the Intake System Specs menu to display this menu. 

Change Primary Venturi Diameter to 1.375 for Holley 2 Barrel 
Select 80 % air bleed from combo box 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Conclusions: 
• The Engine Analyzer Pro includes features to simulate a simple carburetor to estimate required jet sizes. 
Notes on Carb Specs: 
Some carb specs are easy to obtain or measure, like Primary Venturi Diameter.  Others are more difficult, like Venturi Discharge Coef, which is not generally available from carb manufacturers but can be obtained from flow bench tests.  See Sections 2.9.13 and 2.9.9.2. 
However, the Air Bleed % is a number which can only be determined after all other carb specs are set correctly.  Then you must Calculate Performance and see what Primary Jet and Secondary Jet are recommended.  If they match the jet sizes you are currently using, and what you are using gives good performance on the actual engine (12.5 A/F), then Air Bleed % is set approximately correct.  If the program recommends larger jets than you are using, you should reduce the Air Bleed %, and vice versa. 
Because these specs are difficult to determine, the Primary Jet and Secondary Jet should only be used to show trends.  Like in this example, switching to the 400 CFM carb showed the need for large jets at low RPM.  It also showed the trend for Primary Jet to increase with more Air Bleed %.  
Note:  The Engine Analyzer Pro assumes the primary and secondary Venturi Discharge Coef and Air  Bleed % are the same.  However, for many carbs, this is not true.  Therefore, the actual carb may  require different Primary and Secondary Jets, even though the program predicts the same size jets. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.2 Installing Hydraulic And Solid Lifter Camshafts 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading):
 -
 Evaluating Valve Flow & Cam Calculations and General Engine Calculations output (Section 2.8.2) 

-
 Changing Calculation Conditions (Section 2.8.1) 

-
 Specifying Cam Lift Files for cam specs (Section 2.6.1) 

-
 Specifying graph axes scales with the Set Axes graph option (Section 3.4) 


New Cam/Valve Train Specs inputs and features have been added or expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
More than any other single engine modification, the camshaft determines the engine's "personality", from a low speed "stump puller" to a high revving, Formula 1 racer.  Its then no surprise that a great deal of the Engine Analyzer Pro's calculations center 
around the cam profile and timing.  To investigate these calculations we will simulate installing a solid camshaft and a hydraulic camshaft in the restricted small block Chevy. 
To eliminate some complications and save considerable calculation time, we will turn Off Valve Train Dynamics.  This will eliminate the valve train weights and spring forces from the calculations.   (Valve Train Dynamics do have an effect on performance.  Dynamics will be investigated in "For Advanced Users".) 
First, retrieve a fresh copy of the RSTR­SBCHEV from the Engine Library by clicking on the Retrieve button as shown in Example 4.1.  Then we will go into the Cam/Valve Train menu an select No for Calculate Valve Train Dynamics.  See Figure 4.14.  Now all specs of valve train weights and spring rates are ignored in the calculations.  Click on OK to return to the Main Menu. 
As with any engine modification, you first need to obtain a baseline performance test, with the engine “as is”.  This will be 

slightly different than the performance calculated in Example 
4.1 because we have turned Off Valve Train Dynamics.  Click on the Run/HP button at the top of the Main Menu, which is a short cut to calculating performance.  Once performance calculations are done, click on the File menu item in the Menu bar at the top and select Save Current Test Results to Disk.  This time we will save the baseline test results to disk so we can quickly recall them at any time in the future.  See Figure 4.15.  The menu for saving test results will appear as shown in Figure 4.15.  Enter a name like RS355BAS to indicate a Baseline test for a Restricted 355 cubic inch engine.  Fill in descriptive info in the Comments section as this will be displayed in the future when you go to retrieve these results in the future. Be sure to mention that Valve Train Dynamics were turned Off.  (See Section 3.6 for 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
more options for saving test results, like creating a separate directory for all these tests, or moving or renaming test files.) 
Figure 4.16 Saving a Test File Enter name for test file, 
Now that the baseline test results have been save, return to the Main Menu (clicking on Back or pressing <Esc>). Now, let's install and check performance for 2 different camshafts.  One cam is listed in a catalog with typical cam specs.  The other cam is one you have used in another engine, and have measured using Performance Trends' Cam Analyzer. The Cam Analyzer produces a Cam Dr data file from dial indicator and degree wheel measurements.  Table 4.2 shows the specs for these 2 cams and the original cam. 
You will notice that cam grinders for the original cam and hydraulic cam do not give similar specifications, 
up to 8 characters. Click on OK when ready to save Test File. 

Directory where Test File will be saved. See Section 
3.6 for how to change this. 
Enter descriptive comment. 
and that some of the hydraulic cam's do not match the specs of the Pro’s Cam/Valve Train menu.  Fortunately, the Pro has an input menu for Alternate Specs where these specs can be entered directly to make the necessary conversions. 
Table 4.2 Cam Specs from Catalog (except for Solid) 

Catalog Specs  Orig. Inverted Flank Roller  Hydraulic Roller  Solid Inverted Flank Roller  

Int. Open @ .050" Lift  7.5  file  
Int. Close @ .050" Lift  47.5  file  
Int. Recommended Valve Lash  .026  Hyd  .026  
Int. Gross Lift @ Tappet  .353  file  
Int. Gross Valve Lift  .48  file  
Int. Duration @ .050" Lift  247  file  
Int. Advertised Duration  290  file  
Int. Lobe Centerline  99.5  110  
Int. Valve Lift (1.5 Rocker Ratio)  1.5  

Exh. Open @ .050" Lift  52.5  file  
Exh. Close @ .050" Lift  12.5  file  
Exh. Recommended Valve Lash  .026  Hyd  .026  
Exh. Gross Lift @ Tappet  .368  file  
Exh. Gross Valve Lift  .51  file  
Exh. Duration @ .050" Lift  256  file  
Exh. Advertised Duration  300  file  
Exh. Lobe Centerline  113  110  
Exh. Valve Lift (1.5 Rocker Ratio)  1.5  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Hydraulic Cam: 
Install the hydraulic cam by clicking on Cam/Valve Train menu.  See Figure 4.15.  In this menu, first select the correct Lifter (profile) Type.  In this case it is an aftermarket hydraulic roller cam.  Most aftermarket cams are more aggressive than production cams, so select Agr Hyd Roller. This spec is critical as it first tells the program if the lifters are Hydraulic or Solid, and secondly tells the program what to assume for ramp rates for the given duration and lobe lift. 
Then click on See Alternate Specs 

Select Agr Hyd Roller for Profile Type 
Click on See Alternate Specs for inputting Hydraulic Cam specs 
button at the bottom of this menu..  The hydraulic cam’s cam grinder gives opening and closing events at .050" so type them in. Gross Valve Lifts given by the cam grinder to obtain the Max Lobe Lift.  Rocker Arm Ratios were already set to the correct 1.5 which this cam grinder uses for advertising Gross Valve Lift.  If this were not the case, you  would have to enter the rocker arm ratio used by the cam grinder (usually 1.5 for small block Chevys).  Then once Max Lobe Lift was calculated from the cam grinder’s assumed rocker arm ratio and Gross Valve Lift, you could enter the actual Rocker Arm Ratio you were using on the engine.  The Alternate Cam Specs menu should look like Figure 4.16.  Click on OK and return to the standard Cam/Valve Train Specs menu.  
Calculate performance and save these results as a Test File under the name RS355HYD to denote it as a hydraulic cam.  We do not need to plot the data now because the tests results have been saved to disk.   
Tip:  When the menu of Figure 4.16 appears, click on RS355BAS.DAT in the list of test files.  This loads in this files name and comments.  Then you can just make minor modifications rather than retyping the entire name and comments. 
Solid Cam, from Cam Dr File: 
This Solid Lifter cam is one where we have tappet lift data at every 2 crank degrees (every cam degree) saved in a data file.  This particular file was created be Performance Trends' Cam Analyzer, and looks much like a file created by Quadrant Scientific's Cam Dr (tm) system.  The name for the data file is CSTM-260 which has data for both the intake and exhaust lobe.  This file describes the cam lobe more accurately than just using the Pro’s standard profile based on .050" events, maximum tappet lift and an estimated profile type.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.19 Selecting a Cam File 
1. 
Select Use Cam File to use Cam Dr file from Cam Analyzer 

2. 
Click on Pick button to display screen to pick cam file from disk. 

3. 
Choose All Files (*.*) to display all files in the CAMFILES default directory. 

4. 
Click on CSTM-PRO to select this file, then click on OK 

5. 
If you need to, click here to choose a different directory where the cam file may be stored. This is not required for this example. 



Return to the Cam/Valve Train menu, select the Use Cam File option for both the intake and exhaust.  Then click on the Pick button to get the screen shown in Figure 4.19. Follow the instructions outlined in Figure 4.19 and you should get CSTM-260  as the Cam File for both the intake and exhaust.  You will notice that several specs have become disabled when you select the Use Cam File option. 
Figure 4.20 File Options in Graph Screen 
Your comments appear here to remind you of what this test was for.
Select File then Add Saved Test 
to Common List.  You can only Select 
graph saved tests which are in 

(highlight)
the Common List. 
only the 3Select the 3 saved RS355 tests RS355 test one at a time, then click on Add files for to List and Select for Graphing. graphing.It will ask you for an RPM to They willgraphing cycle data. Select appear in6000 RPM for each test. the Selected List at the top. Then click OK. 

You must make some additional changes to the Cam/Valve Train specs.  First, click on Profile (lifter) Type and select any of the Solid types.  This is to tell the program that it must let you specify an Actual Lash.  Then type in .026 for the Actual Lash for the intake and exhaust.  Also type in the Centerlines of 110 for both the intake and exhaust. 
Calculate performance and save this test file as RS355FIL to denote it as using a cam file to specify the cam specs.  Now for the interesting stuff.  Lets compare these 3 test files which have been saved.  After saving the test file, click on the Graph button.  Unlike Example 4.1 where we only compared the “current” results with the “last” results, we are going to compare 3 tests at once. This can only be done by saving test files to disk as we have done here. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
At the Graph screen, click on File, then Add Saved Test to Common List as shown in Figure 4.20.  When finished with the directions in Figure 4.20, click on OK.  Back at the Graph Screen, click on LAST if it is not already selected to get the graph of Figure 4.21. 
The Hydraulic cam shows lower performance for all RPMs, which is to be expected. The original cam shows more low RPM torque and the CSTM-260 cam shows more high RPM HP. 
Figure 4.21 Performance Comparison of 3 Cams 
Click on LIST to graph files from Common List. 
Note that current is the same as RS355FIL data. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Once you have these 3 files loaded into the Common List, it is very easy to make comparison graphs of most anything.  Figure 
4.22 shows a comparison of Valve Lift for the 3 cams.  Although the valve lifts don’t look that different, the engine can tell the difference. 
• 
The gentler ramps of the hydraulic cam (less lift for about the same duration) show a performance loss at all RPMs. 

• 
The later intake closing of the CSTM-260 cam file cam helps top end HP and hurts low end torque. 


Tip:  The Cycle Data of Int & Exh Valve Lift shown in Figure 4.22 does not change with RPM. Therefore we did not have to be careful about using the same RPM for our comparisons between the different cams.  If we graphed Cycle Data that did change with RPM like Cylinder Pressure, Port Pressures, and most any other Cycle Data, we would have to pay attention to the RPM we chose when we added these Test Files to the Common List..  You can add the same test file to the Common List many times, each time selecting a different RPM. This way you can compare Cycle Data for most any RPM from most any saved Test File. 
Saving a Component File 
From the Graph screen, click on Back, then at the Test Results screen click on Back. Open up the Cam/Valve Train menu.  Notice that the current name of the Cam is RSTR-SBC.HEV and the comments are “Restricted 355 SB Chev”. First change the comments to describe this cam, say “Ultradyne 260 deg, 110 lobe centerlines straight up, using Cam Analyzer Cam Dr file”.   
Then click on Save to Library.  You are first asked if you want to save the current cam specs to the current component name of RSTR-SBC.HEV.  Answer No since you may want to use the original cam specs in some other engine at some time.  The program then presents a screen for you to enter a new name for these cam specs.  It defaults to the current name of RSTR-SBC.HEV so you can use it or make minor modifications to it if you want.  We want to change it completely so use the delete key or backspace key to erase it . Then type in UD260-FIL for the new name and click on OK.  See Figure 4.23.  The program will say it will have to modify the name to UD260-FI.L, but answer that that is OK. 
You have now added a new cam and valve train to the Cam Library.  Click on the Retrieve from Library and you will see UD260-FI.L in the list. 
Even though only the cam specs were changed in this test sequence, you could have saved all the engine specs to a new Engine File.  First you  would have modified the engine comments at the Main Menu to accurately describe this engine with the new cam.  Then you would 
Figure 4.23 Saving Engine or Component Files 


Tip: To save an entire Engine File (not a component file), click on File then Save As; or click on the Save button (shown here somewhat hidden by the Cam/Valve Train menu). 
Modify comments to accurately describe these specs before saving. 
Click here to save a Component file 
have clicked on the File (engine) menu item at the Main Menu, then on Save As to give these engine specs a new name.  You could also click on the Save button at the Main Menu.  See the Tip in Figure 4.23. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Change Valve Lash 
To illustrate the flexibility of the Engine Analyzer Pro, change the valve lash on the Solid Lifter camshaft on both intake and exhaust to .020". Calculate performance and do a graph as shown in Figure 4.24.  Remember that now we have 4 conditions and the Current data is the CSTM-260 cam file with .020” lash instead of .026” lash.   
Since this is just an interesting test, and you are not really interested in doing this on the real engine, we’d recommend that you do not save it as a Test File. These results at .020” will be gone once you’ve made a new calculation.  Since the hydraulic cam performed poorly, you may also want to delete it as a Test File.  To do this click on File, then Move/Delete Saved Tests at the Test Results screen or Graph screen.  See Section 3.6 for more details. 
Do not get in the habit of saving all test results. Also, once you know certain test results will no longer be of interest, delete them.  Test Files are very large and you will use up a lot of disk space by saving several.  It is also more confusing to find Test Files when you have saved so many. 
Calculate performance after setting lash to .020” and graph the results.  To get the Torque and HP graph shown in Figure 4.24, click on rpm-CYC to select RPM Data Graphs (will now be displayed as RPM-cyc).  If you do not then get torque and HP vs RPM, click on MIXED and select Tq & HP vs RPM from the Saved Graph Patterns.  If LIST is not printed in all upper case, click on it. Now you should get the first graph of Figure 4.24 showing all 4 conditions you have tested.   
This graph can be somewhat confusing with all 8 different graph lines.  To simplify it, click on LIST to display the Common List of Test Files you could graph.  Then click on RS355BAS.DAT and RS355HYD.DAT to “de-select” them for graphing.  Only the RS255FIL.DAT Test File is selected from the list.  Click on the OK button to produce the second graph in Figure 4.24 which compares the RS355FIL Solid Cam’s performance with the original .026” lash to the .020” lash. 
Figure 4.24 Graphs with Solid Cam at .020” Lash (called “current” in graph) Click on rpm-CYC, LIST 
De-select (click on) RS355BAS and RS355HYD toand MIXED (as necessary) 
unhighlight them. Only RS355FIL is highlighted. Then to produce Torque & HP vs 
click OK button. Only RS355FIL will be graphed withRPM for all 4 cam tests. 


the current test results of RS355 FIL with .020” lash. 
Move cursor left & right with these buttons. 


Click on HP data at 7000 RPM
Click on LIST to 
Cursor values show the
to bring up the cursor (vertical
display the 
.020” lash cam shows
pink line). The exact value of
Common List 
loss at all RPMs except
each graph line at 7000 RPM is
shown between 
a 1 HP improvement at
displayed in the legend.
the graphs. 
7000 RPM. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Click on the Cursor buttons or the graph line at some data point to display the cursor.  Notice that the exact value of the graph lines at the cursor is displayed in the legend.  Move the cursor left or right by clicking on the left or right cursor buttons. See Figure 4.24.  Notice that the .020” lash cam shows a performance loss at all RPMs except 7000 RPM where it shows a modest 1 HP improvement. 
Table 4.3 shows comparisons between various calculated outputs for all 4 camshafts setups, baseline, hydraulic, solid lifter and solid lifter with .020" lash. 
Table 4.3 Comparison of 4 Cams 
Condition  Stock  Hydraulic  Solid  Solid .020” lash  
Int Close @ .050”  43  48  57  57  
Int Closing  62  78  77  81  
Peak Brk Tq  354 @ 3000  334 @ 3000  340 @ 3500  334 @ 3500  
Peak Brake HP  310 @ 6000  298 @ 6000  318 @ 6000  314 @ 6000  
Avg Brake HP  258  246  256  252  
Overlap Area  14.6  13.5  13.4  15.3  
Idle Vacuum  11.2  11.8  11.8  10.9  
Valve Area, sq in*deg  278.0 / 215.0  271.4 / 214.9  283.7 / 204.8  288.6 / 208.1  
Total Exh/Int %  77.3  79.2  72.2  72.1  
Lobe Area  27.40 / 29.45  25.84 / 28.29  27.63 / 26/52  28.24 / 27.11  
Cranking Compression  210  173  174  164  

Discussion of Table 4.3: 
• 
Cam timing and profile affects nearly every aspect of engine performance. 

• 
In general, torque dropped as the actual Int Closing increased or the cam closed later in the cycle.  HP did not always increase due to other factors like total Valve Area which affect high RPM flow capability. If this engine was not restricted by the small carb, this trend could be very different. 

• 
Cranking Compression dropped with increased (later) intake closing. That's because the piston has pushed more fresh charge back past the intake valve before the valve closes.  This traps less air in the cylinder causing lower compression pressure and lower torque levels at low speed. 

• 
Note that Total Exh/Int % is affected significantly by cam timing.  Proper selection of a camshaft can help make up for a poor flowing exhaust or intake port and bring them into balance. 

• 
Valve Areas increased with each "more aggressive" cam and with reduced valve lash.  Remember, we are not changing valve sizes or valve Flow Coef. This is entirely due to cam profile. 

• 
Valve lash has an impact on projected performance and all other calculated results.  In general, reducing valve lash produced a “bigger” cam (all cam measurements, like Lobe Area, Valve Area, etc increased).  However, the engine did not like the increase until very high RPM. 


Conclusions: 
• 
Cam timing and lash affect nearly every aspect of engine performance. 

• 
You can save Test Results in files for recall at any time for comparisons to other test results in graphs. 

• 
You can save Engine specs or Component Specs in files for use building new engine combinations in the future. 

• 
You should become familiar with all calculated results.  They will help you understand why performance changes with engine modifications. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer Pro has several graphing options for you to compare RPM Data or Cycle Data between runs or between different RPMs.  This allows you to quickly spot trends and understand why they occurred. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
For Advanced Users, Valve Train Dynamics: 
First, retrieve the RSTR-SBCHEV file from the TOTAL ENGINE Library and calculate performance for the original cam.   
Repeat the process done in this example except be sure to set the Calculate Valve Train Dynamics option in the Cam/Valve Train menu to Yes.  This tells the program to simulate the bending and "tossing" which can occur in the actual valve train.   
You will notice the torque and HP are different than with the Calculate Valve Train Dynamics option set to No.  You will also notice "Valve Toss" listed in the Notes Summary section at the top of the test results.  This is highlighting the fact the program predicts this combination may toss at one of the RPMs run.  Click on the vertical scroll bar scroll down to the bottom of performance results.  There you will see Valve Toss, with “none” at all RPMs until 7000 RPM, where a "Int" is written. 
Figure 4.27 


Click on Notes button for more Valve Toss pointed out in Notes Summaryexplanation of Notes Summary. 

Click and drag slide bar down to get to bottom of test results to see Valve Toss output. 
Program also shows Dynamic Intake Flow Area increasing at 7000 RPM, from about 96% up close to 100% due to Valve Toss. 
Program shows Valve Toss is likely on the Intake side at 7000 RPM. 
For further detail of valve train dynamics at 7000, let's plot the valve train motion.  Click on the Graph button and follow the instructions shown in Figure 4.28.  Figure 4.29 shows readings at the maximum Pushrod Force point by using the cursor.  Explanations of Figure 4.29 also point out general things to look for when looking at valve train dynamics graphs.  As you can see the actual valve lift is quite a bit greater than the theoretical valve lift on the “slowing down” portion of the opening ramp.  This graph confirms what the test results were showing, that there is Valve Toss on the intake side at 7000 RPM. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.28 Obtaining Graph of Intake Valve Train Dynamics 
1. At Graph screen, first be sure rpm-CYC has “CYC” in upper case to indicate Cycle Data is selected. If it is shown as RPM-cyc click on it to change it to rpm-CYC. 
5. Turn Off last and3..Click on 2. Click on MIXED to get the Mixed 


list as shown here.
Use Saved Data Graph Format menu. Graph Pattern 
4. Click on Int Valve If necessary, click Train Dynamics to on PicRPM to select it, then click OK 
select 7000 RPM for graphing. 


Figure 4.29 
Max pushrod force of 1.1 x 1000 or 1100 lbs on opening ramp. See legend for exact force. 
Where Act IV Lift is less than In Vlv Lift, the valve train is bending, like here on the opening ramp. 

Legend shows pushrod force as 1086 lbs. 
High pushrod force on 
closing ramp also. 
Where Act IV Lift is higher than In Vlv Lift, the valve train is tossing, like here on the “slowing down” portion of the opening ramp. 
Pushrod force goes to 0 when lifter “launches” off cam during valve toss. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
You can actually determine the amount of bending or tossing by subtracting  actual valve lift from the theoretical valve lift. For example, as shown in Figure 4.27 at the cursor at 344 degrees: 
In Vlv Lift = .076 Act IV Lift = .033 Bending = .043 
Repeat the calculations for the Hydraulic Cam and Solid Cam except  with valve train dynamics On for each.  A summary of these performance calculations and plots is contained in Table 4.4. 
Note:  The program must see valve toss (difference between Act IV Lift and In Vlv Lift) greater than a certain amount before it calls the condition Valve Toss. 
Table 4.4 Performance with Valve Train Dynamics ON 
Performance  Original  Hydraulic  Solid  
Peak Brk Tq, Dyn ON  362 @ 3000  338 @ 3500  344 @ 3500  
Peak Brk Tq, Dyn OFF  354 @ 3000  334 @ 3000  340 @ 3500  
Peak Brake HP, Dyn ON  307 @ 6000  299 @ 6000  316 @ 6000  
Peak Brake HP, Dyn OFF  310 @ 6000  298 @ 6000  318 @ 6000  
Max Pushrod Force  1086  880  887  
Called Valve Toss @ 7000  Yes  No  No  
Maximum Toss, inches  .032  .009  .009  

Table 4.4 shows the Hydraulic and Solid cam with lower torque levels than the original cam.  However, they also showed lower pushrod forces, maximum toss and were not called Valve Toss by the program at 7000 RPM. 
It appears that the original cam has more aggressive ramps and is designed to work at lower RPMs.  For a restricted engine which has limited air to burn, the original cam makes good sense.  It produces good power and torque at lower RPMs.  However, the original cam's limited duration and tendency to valve toss at higher RPMs limits its RPM range. 
The Solid lifter does make more peak HP, and would probably be clear winners at all higher RPMs with an unrestricted intake system.  You may want to try this cam comparison again with an 850 CFM carb. 
Table 4.4 also shows another common trend, that the engine produces more torque at low RPM with dynamics turned On and many times less high RPM HP.  That's because the valve actually opens after and closes sooner than the cam would open and close the valve without dynamics.  Look at Figure 4.29 and notice that the Act IV Lift line jumps up more quickly than the In Vlv Lift line on the opening ramp.  The same happens on the closing ramp.  The profile actually followed by the valve has approximately the same lift as directed by the cam, but less duration.  This combination of giving approximately the same higher lifts but limiting the lower lifts generally makes more torque.  However at high RPM where the engine needs all the breathing help it can get, any loss in valve lift limits air flow and therefore limit  HP. 
Conclusions: 
• 
This restricted engine likes the original cam for performance, especially at lower RPM.  However, at higher RPM it has a tendency to valve toss and produce high pushrod loads due to its aggressive acceleration rates.  

• 
The Test Results will generally show more low RPM torque and less high RPM HP with valve train dynamics being simulated. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer Pro allows you to investigate the complex workings of the engine's valve train. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
A Couple of Tips: 
Instead of recreating the cam specs in the Cam/Valve Train menu as done in the first part of this example, you could have retrieved each saved test file in the Common List from the Test Results screen as shown in Figure 4.30.  Click on File, then Pick Test from Common List.  Click on RS355HYD.DAT and click on OK.  When asked if you want to use the engine specs which produced these results answer Yes. You have now retrieved the Test Results (including cam specs) for the Restricted 355 Chevy with the Hydraulic cam. 
Answer No to the next question: “Do you want to save the current specs.”  Then return to the Main Menu, select Cam/Valve Train Specs and select Yes for Calculate Valve Train Dynamics.  You will notice all the other Hydraulic cam’s specs were reloaded properly. Recalculate performance to obtain performance for the Hydraulic cam with Valve Train Dynamics turned On. 
Figure 4.30 Alternate way to Recreate Cam Specs for Testing with Valve Train Dynamics On 
Important: Answer Yes to 
Select Test File whether engineRetrieve saved Test from Common specs shouldFile from Common List and then be retrievedList at Test Results click OK. 
also.
screen. 

Another feature which helps analyze valve train dynamics is the See-Engine screen shown in Figure 4.31.  The See-Engine menu item is 2 options to the right of the File menu item highlighted in Figure 4.30.  In the See-Engine screen you can watch the valves and piston move, watch port pressures and velocities.  Table 4.4 showed Maximum Valve Toss, which is theoretical valve lift - actual valve lift.  The See-Engine does this math automatically for you as shown in Figure 4.31. 
Figure 4.31 See-Engine Feature to Determine Max Valve Toss 

Minimum Piston to Valve clearance is shown here and is a great aid to engine builders. 
Valve Toss and Valve Train Bending shown here. Cycle through all crank degrees (click on the Continuous button) to find the maximum values as shown in Table 4.4. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.3 Supercharging, Turbo-     charging & Nitrous Oxide 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading): 
• 
Changing Turbocharger and Supercharger Specs (Section 2.7) 

• 
Specifying nitrous oxide injection (Section 2.8.1) 

• 
New results for turbo/supercharger performance (Section 2.8.2) 


New Turbocharger inputs and features have been added or expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
Popular street "bolt on" performance modifications include nitrous oxide injection systems, superchargers and turbochargers.  The Engine Analyzer Pro lets you simulate all 3 types of systems in detail. 
For this street application, we will use the 302-4V Mustang engine.  Retrieve the 302-4V from the Engine Library by clicking on the Retrieve button at the Main Menu.  Calculate baseline performance and save these test results to a test file with the name of 302-BASE. In stock condition, the 302-4V makes 270 ft lbs @ 3200 and 210 HP @ 4800. 
Turbocharger: 
You first want to check the performance potential of the 302-4V with a turbocharger, so click on the Turbo/Supercharger button on the Main Menu, then select Turbocharger for type and click on View Specs.  This opens up the Turbocharger menu shown in Figure 4.32.  One way to simulate a turbo is to edit the turbocharger specs in this menu.  The other way is to retrieve a set of specs from the  Turbocharger Specs Library.  Click on Retrieve from Library and then select TB302­AR.67 and click on OK.  Then answer No to the “Save your (possible) changes...” question. 
Back at the Turbocharger menu, you see the specs for this turbo.  The single turbo is set up with Max Boost Limit = 8.8 PSI, indicating a boost control limit via a wastegate.  It also has no intercooler.  It draws air through the carb (carb before the turbo) rather than blowing through the carb.  From the comments, you see this is a relatively small turbo, used on the first production Buick turbo V-6.  With this single change, return to the Main Menu and calculate performance.  Let's see how this performs on the production 302-4V. 
When performance has been calculated, scroll down through all the results.  You will notice new outputs at the bottom of the  Test Results as shown in Figure 4.33.  These outputs deal only with turbocharger performance.  For example, Wastetgt,% is more than 0 at several RPMs.  This indicates the percent of exhaust the wastegate bypasses around the exhaust turbine, to limit boost to 8.8 PSI.  These turbo parameters are explained on page 86. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 

It is difficult to see here, but Notes Summary is warning of “Detonation Very Likely” with turbocharger installed. 
Knock Index well over 2 at all RPMs, indicating spark knock or detonation is very likely at all RPMs 
Click and drag the slide bar 
down to display the 
turbocharger outputs. 
Turbocharger outputs which describe how the turbocharger is performing, are shown here 
Figure 4.35 is the approximate compressor map for this turbocharger, which you could obtain from the turbo supplier.  The points on the map are the operating points for each RPM of the calculation.  They are determined by plotting Actual CFM (not shown in Figure 4.33) and PR (as shown in Figure 4.33).  These operating points lie to the right of the peak efficiency island. If they were closer to the efficiency island, Compressor Eff would be much higher.  This indicates the turbo is not operating at its peak efficiency, and may be sized incorrectly.  Since the operating points are at a higher CFM flow than the peak efficiency island, it appears that the turbo may be too small for this application. 
Other points of interest include: 
• 
This turbocharger provides a huge increase in torque, over 400 ft lbs at 2800 RPM. 

• 
HP has increased to over 300 from 4000 to 5200 RPM 

• 
As the Notes section points out, Knock Index is warning of possible knock or detonation.  Scroll down to Knock Index in the results, and you see values from 21-4.6, indicating detonation is Very likely. This turbo would require either very high octane gas or significant spark retard. See For Advanced Users. 

• 
Intake Vac is now reported as Boost in PSI because the engine is now turbocharged.  This means a positive boost pressure exists in the intake manifold.  Also notice that boost gets up to 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
8.8 PSI and stays there.  This is due to the wastegate limiting boost to 8.8 PSI. 
• 
Exh Pres is much higher than stock.  This increased Exh Pres is where the turbo gets its power to compress the fresh air charge. 

• 
Actual CFM air flow has increased from 343 to 489 at 5600 RPM.  The stock 600 CFM carb should still be adequate for flow. 

• 
Recommend Primary Jet and Secondary Jet have decreased somewhat with the turbo. The higher air flow provides a stronger metering signal.  The carb may have to be rejetted with smaller jets.  (If this was a "blow through" system the recommended Primary Jet and Secondary Jet would be entirely different.) 

• 
Fuel Flow has increased from 120 lbs/hr to 171 at 5600 RPM.  Fuel lines and fuel pump capacity may not be large enough. If this was a fuel injected engine, the injectors may not be capable of handling the extra fuel flow. 

• 
In Port Tmp or intake port temperatures have increased from 161 to 270 degrees at 5600 RPM.  Any type of compressor in the intake system will raise the air temperature simply due to compression and inefficiency in the compression process.  This 


temperature rise also contributes to the increased Knock Index. 
A very simple way to increase the size of this turbo is to simply "install" 2 of them.  Return to the Turbocharger Specs menu and select 2 for # Turbos/Stages.  Now calculate performance for this "twin turbo" 302. 
Calculate performance and overplot this data with the base engine and single turbo data, as shown in Figure 4.36.  The plot shows a relatively small improvement in HP at all RPMs. The main reason for the small improvement in HP is that both the single and twin turbo systems were limited to 8.8 PSI of boost.  The twin turbo system's only advantage is the boost is produced more efficiently: 
• 
Compressor Eff is in the 70% range at most  RPMs. 

• 
In Port Tmp is much cooler, 53 


 1.2
 1.0 0 100 200 300 400  CFM 

degrees cooler at 5600. 
• Exh Pres is over about 4 PSI less at 5600. 
This efficiency improvement is also pointed out by plotting the Compressor PR and Actual CFM points for this system on Figure 4.35.  These points are much closer to the center of the efficiency island. (Note that since there are 2 turbos, you must plot half of Actual CFM, since half goes through each turbo. 
The performance of the base, single turbo and twin turbo engines are plotted in Figure 4.36.  Although the twin turbo is more efficient and does produce more HP, it may not be worth the expense and complication over the single turbo.  However, if you were to go to higher boost and/or make additional engine modifications, the twin turbo would likely show a bigger 

performance advantage. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Note:  The Engine Analyzer Pro does not simulate "turbo lag" or response time.  A single turbo is faster responding than twin turbos of equal size, which may be an important advantage of the single turbo setup for street performance which the Pro can not show. 
Safety Note:  Remember, the turbo manufacturer has experience with factors not considered by the Engine Analyzer Pro.  These factors include high exhaust temperatures affecting durability, over revving the turbo, turbo lag, etc.  The Engine Analyzer Pro should only be used to estimate performance gains and understand the performance tradeoffs.  Installing a turbo not properly matched to the engine can be dangerous to you and your engine. 
Centrifugal Supercharger: 
Return to the Main Menu, click on Turbo/Supercharger, select Centrifugal and click on View Specs.  Retrieve the 1-PAXTON file of a belt driven, centrifugal supercharger from the Centrifugal Supercharger Library. From the comments, you see this typical single Paxton centrifugal supercharger for street applications.  If has no intercooler but is set up to blow through the carb (carb after the compressor).  The centrifugal Belt Ratio is currently set at 1.75, but can be easily changed.  If you know the actual pulley diameters, you could click on the Clc button by Belt Ratio and calculate belt ratio from these diameters.  For now, leave it at 1.75. 
Calculate performance.  Figure 4.37 shows 3 Single Data graphs of RPM Data.  Compared to the single turbo performance: 
• 
The centrifugal supercharger does not provide as much boost, torque or HP. 

• 
The boost for this set-up does not really start until 2400 RPM. Increasing the belt ratio would definitely bring on the boost sooner and likely produce more boost and HP at higher RPMs.  However, we could be in danger of over-revving the supercharger at higher RPM. 

• 
With less boost at low RPM, the centrifugal supercharger shows a lower Knock Index (less likelihood to detonate) at lower RPMs. 

• 
Exh Pres does not increase as significantly as with the turbo.  However, Compressor HP gets as high as 34 HP at 5600.  This is the HP the compressor requires from the crankshaft (through the S/C belt). 

• 
The recommended Primary Jet and Secondary Jet have increased significantly.  This is typical of "blow through" systems, which require larger jets. 


Safety Note: Unlike real superchargers, you can over-rev the supercharger in the Engine Analyzer Pro with no problems.  The Pro will warn you of the over-revving condition based on the Maximum Safe Impeller RPM spec and belt ratio, but it is up to you to pay attention to it.  Always follow the manufacturer's recommendations for maximum belt ratios and RPM limits. 
Figure 4.37 Single Data Graphs Comparing Baseline, Single Turbo and Paxton Performance Horsepower Primary Jet  Knock Index 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Since the centrifugal supercharger provides fairly good high RPM power, you are considering installing nitrous oxide injection as well. You have heard that nitrous delivers tremendous low speed torque, which would fill in torque at low RPM where the supercharger builds little boost. At the Calculation Conditions menu, click on the With Nitrous Oxide option which enables the See Nitrous Specs button.  Click on this button to display the Nitrous Oxide Specs menu shown in Figure 4.38.  We will simulate a "small" 100 HP, 
Figure 4.38 Nitrous Oxide Specs for 100 HP Single Stage System 
Select Single Stage System Enter specs of 100 HP and 2500 RPM to simulate this nitrous system. 

Graph shows summary of manufacturer’s rating of HP added by nitrous versus engine RPM. 

single stage nitrous system, activated at 2500 RPM by setting the Specs as shown in Figure 4.38. 
Recalculate performance and overplot torque and HP as shown in Figure 4.39. Even a relatively small nitrous system does provide HP improvements, even at low RPM (indicating tremendous torque improvement).  Test Results show a 135 ft lb increase at 2800 RPM..  Other factors to consider from the calculated results include: 
• Nitrous (nitrous oxide) flow jumps up to 322 lbs/hr and Ntrs Fuel (fuel flow for the nitrous) jumps to 45 at 2800 RPM and hold constant. You will notice that Fuel Flow( fuel flow from the injectors or in this case the carburetor) remains basically unchanged. The Pro assumes Ntrs Fuel 
Figure 4.39 Performance of Paxton + Nitrous with 
comes from a separate source typical of most 
Paxton Alone, Single Turbo and Baseline
nitrous oxide injection systems. 
• 
Max Cyl Pres (maximum cylinder pressure) has increased from 832 PSI to over 1100 PSI at 2800.  Above 2800 Max Cyl Pres has also increased at least 100 PSI.  Better head gaskets, head bolts, etc may be needed. 

• 
Required Spark Advanc dropped from 22.5 degrees to 14.5 degrees at 2800. Nitrous burns faster, requiring less spark advance.  Be sure to retard your spark when you run nitrous. 

• 
Note that In Port Tmp drops from 186 to 122 degrees. The Pro assumes some of the nitrous does evaporate and cool the air charge in the intake manifold  However, real nitrous systems usually cool more than what the Pro indicates. 

• 
As pointed out with the turbo set-up, Actual CFM air flow and Fuel Flow have increased significantly over the base engine.  The fuel 



system components may need to be enlarged and the carburetor re-jetted. 
Figure 4.39 shows that the centrifugal supercharger with a small nitrous oxide kit produces significantly more HP than any other system tested at all RPMs above 2500 RPM, where nitrous injection is activated.  You may decide this approach  gives the best “bang for the buck” for improved performance. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Conclusions: 
• 
Turbocharging, supercharging and injecting nitrous oxide can provide a significant performance increase on a basically stock engine. 

• 
Turbocharging and supercharging make an engine prone to spark knock (the Knock Index increases significantly) where boost is high.  Care must be taken to prevent detonation by retarding spark, running high octane fuel, etc. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer Pro provides a method to estimate performance increases and points out potential problems before the modification is made (excessive spark knock, insufficient fuel pump capacity, rejetting the carburetor, etc.) 

• 
As with any modifications, the Engine Analyzer Pro can not consider all details.  Therefore, you must follow the manufacturer's recommendations for safe, reliable operation of a particular system. 


The new Enterprise Edition has several features for working with turbo compressor maps in more detail, and for graphing the operating point on the compressor map during calculations.  Check it out in Appendix 13, page 287. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
For Advanced Users, Limiting Knock Index: 
As shown by Knock Index, several of these modifications significantly increased the engine's tendency to spark knock or detonate.  The simplest ways to avoid detonation is to either increase octane or retard spark advance.  Since there is a limit to what octane fuel can be purchased on the street, most engines run spark curves with significant spark retard. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro lets you run most any spark curve you want using the Spark Curve Specs available through the Calculation Conditions menu.  For the calculations run in the previous section of this example Spark Curve Specs were set to Program sets spark for best power. This tells the computer to determine the engine's burn rate and then set a spark advance giving maximum power for this burn rate.  Very few engines, especially race or boosted, can run optimum spark advance with street octane gas. 
By selecting the Use Specified Spark Curve option , the See Specs button becomes enabled.  Click on this button to open up the Spark Curve Specs Menu where you can customize the spark curve.  You will notice for the Projected Performance of the stock 302-4V, the Knock Index was highest at lower RPMs. This is typical, as most engines are more prone to knock at low RPM.  However, with boosted engines, the highest Knock Index appears with the highest boost level.  Therefore, the spark curve you build in the Pro will should have less spark advance at low RPM and RPMs with high boost levels. 
The only way to develop a spark curve which reduces Knock Index to a certain level is by "cut and try". Let's take the example of the single turbo.  We'll leave Fuel Octane under Fuel Specs at 87 which can be found at any gas station.  If you had wanted to design to high octane street gas, you could set Fuel Octane to 91-93 before building the spark curve. The method would be the same. 

You must also decide what level of Knock Index you will accept. The stock 302-4V had a Knock Index of 
2.8 to 1.0.  The Pro states that detonation is very likely with a Knock Index over 2.  Knowing this and the fact that you will usually run a fuel with better than 87 octane, you could design to run a Knock Index of 2.0 or less. We will try to obtain a spark curve which limits Knock Index to 2.0.  
First some rules for designing spark curves: 
• 
There is no advantage to over-advancing the spark from what the Pro sets when the option Program sets spark for best power has been selected. 

• 
If you know a spark advance which produces a high Knock Index, you must retard it to reduce Knock Index. 


Following these rules we look at Figure 4.40.  Knock Index is 2.0 or less at 4000 RPM or higher with optimum spark advance.  Therefore, no retard is needed from the current optimum spark at 4000 on up.  The current spark ramps up from 21 degrees at 2000 to 26 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
degrees at 4000 where Knock Index ramps down from 2.8 to 2.0.  This is the section we will have to adjust. 
The first brake point could be at 2000 RPM, with a spark advance retarded from the current 21 degrees, say 10 degrees.  The second break point could be at 4000 RPM, using the current 26 degrees.  Lets try these specs as shown in Figure 4.41 and see what happens. 
The settings shown in Figure 4.41 mean the computer will determine the engine's burn rate just as before, but the spark advance 
Figure 4.42 Effect of Custom Spark Curve Specs Brake Torque Spark Advance  Knock Index 

will be set from these Spark Curve specs.  Spark will start at 10 degrees until 2000 RPM.  Then it will "ramp" up to 26 degrees at 4000 RPM where it will stay as RPM increases. Calculate performance for this specified spark curve and plot Brk Tq, Spark Advance and Knock Index over the baseline as shown if Figure 4.42.   
Figure 4.42 shows Knock Index is less than 2.0 at all RPMs with the new custom spark curve settings.  You will also notice a drop in performance from the retarded spark at low RPM, where spark was retarded the most from the original Optimum spark curve. However, at high RPM there is almost no loss in performance. 
With further adjustment of the Spark Curve specs, you might obtain a curve with Knock Index of exactly 2.0 at all RPMs.  However, your detailed effort may be wasted. Remember that the program does not exactly know your engine.  One cylinder running a little hotter or a little leaner may start knocking 5 to 10 degrees before the others.  You can only use the Pro to find trends or develop a starting point for a spark curve.  The Pro’s projected performance will always be slightly different from the actual engine. 
Conclusions for Advanced Users: 
• 
The Pro has detailed features for investigating an engine's tendency to detonate or spark knock. 

• 
The Pro gives the user great freedom to build custom spark curves. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.4 Using Flow Bench Data 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading):
 - Cylinder Head(s) Specs and Flow Table (Section 2.3) 
New Head Specs and Flow Table inputs and features have been added or expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 -13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro allows you to enter flow bench data for your cylinder heads and intake manifold separately.  From this information you can determine the flow restriction of the head; flow restriction and tuning capabilities of the manifold runner or header and any "anti-reversion" characteristics. 
The Pro lets you characterize the port and valve flow capacity (Flow Coef) two ways: 
• 
Use Single Flow Coef 

• 
Use Flow Table 


Use Single Flow Coef  enables the Single Flow Coef spec which describes the flow capability at one valve lift point, namely at L/D = .25.  Use Flow Table lets you enter flow data into a table at several valve lift points. 
For the first part of this example, we will just use one Flow Coef value at L/D of .25.  The section "For Advanced Users" describes the use of a full Flow Table. 
The basic procedure for obtaining flow data for the Pro is to: 
• 
Flow the head with an optimum entrance or exit adapter to get data to calculate Flow Coef at L/D=.25. 

• 
To determine Runner Flow Coef, flow again with the actual manifold or header replacing the entrance/exit adapter.  

• 
To determine anti-reversion, flow the head and manifold or header in the reverse direction.   


For this example, let's assume our circle track class rules have been changed.  Next year we must run stock, unported cast iron heads (1.94 intake valve, 170 cc ports) and intake manifold (runners 2" high by 1.1" wide).  We will flow test these parts and use the Pro to estimate the HP loss with the new head and intake manifold.  The flow numbers used in the example are arbitrary. Your flow tests will likely show similar but not equivalent trends. 
Flow Test: 
This flow test will be performed at 28" water test pressure, but it could be any test pressure over 7" water. To calculate the port/valve Flow Coef, the Engine Analyzer Pro needs flow data at an L/D of .25, which is .485" valve lift for the 1.94" valve. It is not necessary to flow the valve at exactly .485" lift. Any lift from .470" to .500" would be close enough to L/D=.25.  However, do record the exact lift where the port was flowed which the program will use to calculate Flow Coef. 
To obtain the optimum air flow for the head only, it is necessary to install a radiused inlet adapter on the intake port.  Set up the test condition of 28" test pressure and .485" lift with the adapter.  The flow reads 201 CFM. Leave all flow bench settings "as is" and remove the adapter.  You may note that the flow drops, for example to 191 CFM without the adapter when you adjust the test pressure back to 28". (It may be necessary to shut down the flow bench between readings to avoid overheating.) 
Now install the intake manifold without the carb or throttle body.  Be sure all openings in the manifold other than carb/throttle body opening are sealed.  This includes all runners not being tested, vacuum ports, injector bosses, EGR openings, etc.  Adjust 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
the test pressure back to 28" and you obtain a reading of 194 CFM.  Note that the head and intake flow better than just the head without the adapter but not as good as with the entrance adapter.   
To obtain flow data to calculate anti-reversion, reduce the valve lift to approximately .100” lift with the intake manifold installed and record air flow in the normal, intake direction.  You obtain 54 CFM  Then turn off the bench and reverse the flow direction by switching to exhaust flow direction.  Start the bench and you will note the flow falls to 48 CFM when you adjust the test pressure back to 28". 
Table 4.5 Flow Test Results, 1.94" Intake Valve 
Condition  Test Pres  Valve Lift  L/D  CFM  
Head, no adapter *  28"  .485"  .25  191  
Head, optimum adapter  28"  .485"  .25  201  
Head and intake  28"  .485"  .25  194  
Head and Intake, for anti-reversion  .100  .05  54  
Head and intake, reverse direction for anti-reversion  28"  .100"  .05  48  

* This data is not used, just given for information. 
Now, start up the Engine 
Figure 4.43 Calculating Avg Port Diameter for Intake Port
Analyzer Pro program.  Retrieve a new copy of the 
Click here to open up
RSTR-SBCHEV file by 

this Calculation Menu Calculated port
clicking on the retrieve button 
diameter
at the Main Menu Calculate 
appears here
performance to obtain baseline performance with the production head and intake.  Save these test results as a 
Choose Yes
Test File (if you have not 
here first
saved them before). 
Fill in port
Return to the cylinder Head(s) 
measurements.
menu and enter the new Intake Valve Diameter of 1.94. Leave Int Port Length at 4.5 
Click here to load 
inches, since both heads' 
calculated diameter 
intake ports are equally long.  
back into Avg Port
Then click on Clc for Intake 
Diameter in 
Avg Port Diameter to get this 
Head(s) menu
Calculation Menu as shown in Figure 4.43.  Follow the descriptions in Figure 4.43 to 
Click here to calculate Single Flow Coef calculate 1.71 for the new Avg Port Diameter for the 
Click here to calculate Anti-Reversion 
new head. 
After calculating Avg Port Diameter, click here to tell program
Then click on the Intake 
you only have flow data at 1 valve lift.
option of Use Single Flow Coef. The Single Flow Coef spec and Clc button become enabled and the Flow Table button becomes disabled. Click on the Clc button to calculate Single Flow Coef to obtain the first menu shown in Figure 4.44.  The flow data of 201 CFM at 28” test pressure at .485” valve lift produces a Calc Valve Flow Coef of .444.  Click on Use Calc Value to copy this back to the Head specs menu.  Next click on the Anti-Reversion Clc button to produce the second menu of Figure 4.44.  Fill in the flow data of 54 CFM in the normal direction and 48 in the reverse direction.  This produces a Calc Anti-Reversion of 11%.  Again click on the Use Calc Value to copy 11 back to the Head specs menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
The Intake port specs in the cylinder Head(s) menu now represent the new head. To simplify this example, we are neglecting combustion  chamber design, exhaust port, compression ratio, and other specs about the new head. 
Next go to the Intake System menu and click on Clc for Runner Dia @ Head.  You will get the menu of Figure 
4.43. Since you do not have runner volumes for the manifold, choose No for Know Runner Volume.  Then enter width and height dimensions from measurements made at the mating face to the cylinder head.  Enter the manifold's runner width of 1.1, height of 2 and choose Rectangular for Shape.  These inputs result in a Calc Avg Diameter of 1.67.  Click on Use Calc Value to return to the Intake System menu with 1.67 entered for Runner Dia @ Head. 

Next, click on Clc Runner Flow Coef to obtain the Calc Runner Flow Coef menu shown in Figure 4.45.  Figure 
4.45 shows the test data from Table 4.5 filled in and a calculated Runner Flow Coef of 2.213. Click on Use Calc Value to return to the Intake System menu with 2.213 entered for Runner Flow Coef. 
This new manifold is a dual plane design, like the stock manifold so Manifold Type will stay Dual Plane-carbs.  The corner runners measure approximately 6" long, while the inside runners measure 4".  That would average out to 5" for the Runner Length for the new intake.  Rules also state that the crossover must be open and no heat shield can be used under the intake.  

Therefore, set pick Prod (full) Heat for Intake Heat.  The same carburetor will be used, so Total CFM Rating will stay at 255. 
Calculate performance for the RSTR-SBCHEV with the new head and intake manifold.  Figure 4.46 is a comparison graph of the baseline with the new, more restrictive intake.  As the graph shows, performance has dropped at all RPMs.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 

The new heads and intake dropped peak HP from 307 to 276 and dropped average HP from 257 to 240.  Remember we only changed the intake port.  We would have to change the exhaust port and other exhaust specs for a true comparison. 
Alternate Method: 
If it is difficult to design optimum exhaust and intake adapters, or this data is not available, it is then best to flow the head with the appropriate manifold or header.  For the example above, this would give 194 CFM.  Most of the restriction is due to the valve and some is due to the manifold runner. 
A reasonable assumption is 4% of the total flow restriction is due to the runner.  If you multiply the CFM flow for both the port and manifold together by 1.04 you will obtain a reasonable flow value to use for the head itself.  In this case 194 CFM x 1.04 = 202 CFM. Using 202 CFM you would calculate a valve Flow Coef of .447, and an input of 194 would calculate a Runner Flow Coef of 1.892.  These numbers are similar to those actually measured in Table 4.5. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Engine Analyzer Pros calculation menus allow you to easily calculate valve Flow Coef, anti reversion, and Runner Flow Coef from flow bench data. 

• 
An alternative method is suggested if you only have data for flowing the head and manifold as a unit. 


For Advanced Users: 
Many times the difference between cylinder heads may not be significant at the L/D = .25 point.  For example, one head may have much more low lift flow than another due to valve seat modifications.  The only way to investigate these detailed modifications is by entering the full flow curve into the Pro’s Flow Table.   
To obtain your flow data for the Flow Table, follow the recommendations in the first section of this example.  Use entrance and exit adapters when flowing the head itself.  Obtain flow CFM at some constant test pressure (over 7" water) at several lift  points.   
For an ideal test obtain CFM for 6 somewhat evenly spaced lift points between 0 lift and L/D=.25, one CFM point at L/D = .25, and one CFM point at the maximum valve lift (before coil bind).  At the L/D=.25 lift point, also record flow with the actual intake or exhaust manifold/header (to calculate Runner Flow Coef) and the reverse flow with the actual manifold/header (to calculate anti-reversion).  You do not need these extra points at all lifts, just at L/D=.25.  See Table 4.6. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Table 4.6 Full Flow Test Results, 1.94” Intake Valve 
Condition  Test Pres  Valve Lift  L/D  CFM  
Head, optimum adapter  28”  .050”  .03  26  
Head, optimum adapter (also used for Anti-Reversion calculation)  28”  .100”  .05  54  
Head, optimum adapter  28”  .200”  .10  102  
Head, optimum adapter  28”  .300”  .15  140  
Head, optimum adapter  28”  .400  .21  174  
Head, optimum adapter  28”  .450  .23  191  
Head, optimum adapter  28”  .485  .25  201  
Head, optimum adapter  28”  .600  .31  205  
Head and intake manifold  28”  .485”  .25  194  
Head and intake manifold, for Anti-Reversion, reverse direction  28”  .100  .05  48  

To load these flow test results into the Flow Table, first set the Intake Valve Diameter to 1.94 in the cylinder Head(s) menu. Then bring up the Flow Table by selecting the Use Flow Table option which enables the Flow Table button.  Then click the Flow Table button to display the Flow Table as shown in Figure 4.47. 
First, you must enter the test pressure or 28 “ at which the head was flowed. 
Then start entering valve lifts and CFM flows measured at 28".  You may first want to use the Clear All Data button to clear out the flow table, or you can just type the new numbers over the existing flow data.  As you enter valve lifts and CFMs, you will see the L/D automatically calculated and displayed, plus the Flow Coef at that particular lift.  When you enter .485" lift and 201 CFM, you will notice that the Flow Coef calculated is .444  This is the same as was calculated from the simpler menu in the first section of this example. 
Figure 4.47 shows all the new flow data entered and the resulting Flow Coefs.  Notice the trend of Flow Coef being relatively high at low lifts, then slowly dropping until L/D=.25, then increasing again at higher lifts.  This is the normal trend and is easy to see in the graph.  If you have Flow  Coefs which do not follow this trend, it may be
 Figure 4.47 Intake Flow Table 
pointing out an error in the data.  Also see Figure 2.8 on page 18.  When you are finished entering data, simply click on OK to return to the Head(s) menu. 
If we had not just performed the first part of this example, where we calculated Anti-Reversion, Intake Manifold Runner Flow Coef, and the port and runner diameters, we would have to do that before calculating performance.  We would also have to change the other intake manifold specs as we did in the first part of this example.  We will assume this has already been done, and that you saved the baseline performance and performance with the Single Flow Coef calculated from flow data as Test Files.  Therefore, we do not have to repeat those tests.   
Figure 4.48 shows the performance for the 3 conditions, 2 from the first part of this example, and the last one from using the Flow Table to characterize the flow of the intake port. As you can see, performance is down when using the full Flow Table.  The reason is that the actual port did not flow as well at valve lifts other than L/D = .25 as what the Pro 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
assumed it would.  This is pointed out in the Valve Flow Area graph shown in Figure 4.48.  See Figure 2.37 on page 88 for a definition of Valve Flow Area.  Valve Flow Area is significantly less when using the Flow Table, which results in less air flow capacity and therefore less HP. 
The Pro also calculates the exact Valve Flow Area and displays this in the Special Calculations section (lower half) of the test results as shown in Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6 Comparison of Single Flow Coef and Flow Table Performance 
Condition  Peak HP  Avg HP  Valve Flow Area, sq in x deg  
Original Baseline with 2.02 intake valve  307  257  278.0  
1.94” intake valve using Single Flow Coef  276  240  244.5  
1.94” intake valve using complete Flow Table  268  236  229.9  

Table 4.6 shows the same trend as Figure 4.48, that the computer assumes the Valve Flow Area is greater than it actually is if you just use Flow Coef=.444.  The major difference is in the "mid lift" points.  At the cam's peak lift at around 450 degrees, the 
Figure 4.48 Performance and Valve Flow Area for Baseline, Single Flow Coef and Flow Table Performance Intake Valve Flow Area 

Valve Flow Areas are the same.  However, the original head with the 2.02" valve flows significantly more at all but the very low lifts.  This points out the need to have a full flow curve for the head, both intake and exhaust, for the best performance predictions. 
Figures 4.48 and Table 4.6 also show that the higher the Valve Flow Area, the higher the HP output. 
Conclusions for Advance Users: 
• 
For the maximum accuracy, it is best to have a complete flow curve for the intake and exhaust ports. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer Pros Flow Table menu allows you to easily enter the flow curve data, recorded at most any test pressure. 

• 
The Flow Table's Flow Coef calculations let you spot errors in the flow data you enter.        


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.5 Optimizing Tuning 
Features Introduced (and suggested background reading):
 -
 Appendix 1  Accuracy and Assumptions 

-
 Appendix 3  Intake and Exhaust Tuning 

-
 Appendix 5  Watching Tuning Pressure and Flow 


New inputs and features for graphing have been added or expanded in later versions.  See Appendices 9 - 13 on pages 235-312 for more updated info. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro simulates the pressure pulsations which are present in the intake and exhaust runners.  These pulsations are critical to obtain optimum performance, especially for naturally aspirated, free flowing race engines.  With intake and exhaust systems designed to take advantage of these pulses, volumetric efficiencies of well over 100% are possible without supercharging. 
Since tuning effects are most noticeable with free flowing heads and high overlap cams, we will use the SUPERSTOCK Buick V-6 engine for this example. In this example, we will show how to use cycle plots to understand the tuning pulses in the intake and exhaust system and how they affect performance.  To simplify things and save calculation time, we will look primarily at 7500 RPM, an RPM close to the HP peak. 
Retrieve a copy of SUPERSTOCK from the library. Calculate performance with the ‘Starting Point’ Recommendations RPM under Calculation Conditions set to 7500.  Important points from these Test Results include: 
• 
Mach# at 7500 RPM is a relatively low .415 indicating the intake valve should not be too restrictive at this RPM. 

• 
The TOTAL EXH/INT % of 81.9 is somewhat higher than the recommended 75%.  Therefore, the exhaust valve and cam profile should not be too restrictive.  The recommended intake runner size for 7500 RPM is 10.4 inches long by 2.16 inches in diameter, which is slightly shorter and wider than the current intake runner size.  See Figure 4.49. 


Note:  The dimensions recommended in Figure 4.49 are based on very general “rules of thumb”.  The Engine Analyzer Pro’s calculations are not based on these same rules.  Therefore, the Pro may not give best performance with these runner dimensions.  However, they are useful as a starting point. 
Table 4.7 shows a comparison between these recommendations and the engine's current specs.  It is not surprising that most of the recommendations are very close to the Buick's current specs.  This engine has been fairly well optimized for performing between 6000-8500 RPM. Let's look first at changing the intake runner dimensions, then the exhaust to see the effect on runner pressures and velocities.  Each test will be saved as a test file to allow for easy comparison graphs. 
Table 4.7 Current Buick V-6 Specs versus Recommended Dimensions for Good Tuning at 7500 RPM 
Dimensions *  Current (actual)  Recommended  
Intake Port Length + Runner Length  10  10.4  
Avg of Int Port Dia and Runner Dia  approx 1.96  2.16  
Exh Port Length + Header Primary Length  34.5  38  
Avg of Exh Port Dia and Header Primary Diameter  approx 2.0  1.97  

* Recommended dimensions are from the valve to either the plenum or collector.  Therefore, you must add the port length in the head to the runner length. You must also account for the port diameter being different than the runner length. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure 4.49 Special Calculations Section Showing Runner and Cam Recommendations 
Recommended Intake Runner Length from valve to plenum for user specified 7500 RPM 
Recommended Exhaust Runner Length from valve to collector for user specified 7500 RPM 
Recommended Average Intake Runner Diameter from valve to plenum for user specified 7500 RPM 
Recommended Average Exhaust Runner Diameter from valve to collector for user specified 7500 RPM 
Click and drag slide bar to display all Special Calculations like Recommendations show here which are at the bottom of these results. 
Intake Tuning: 
First, let's look at changing the intake runner's length and compare the In Port Vel and InPort Prs for 3 cases, original length, shorter and longer.  First, subtract 3" from the original Runner Length of 5" under Intake System.  Calculate performance with this 2" runner.  Notice that Brk Tq, Brake HP and Vol Eff% have dropped at almost all RPMs.  Save these results as a test file for comparison plots. 
Return to the Intake System menu and now add 3" to the original Runner Length of 5" for a length of 8".  Calculate performance again and save these results as a test file for comparison plots.  Figure 4.50 shows intake tuning pressures and velocities for these 3 conditions.  It points out general trends which apply for most all engines concerning intake tuning: 
• 
The longer the runner, the deeper the suction pulse at the start of the piston’s downward stroke after TDC.  This deep suction pulse can hurt performance if extremely deep and extremely long.   

• 
The longer the runner, the higher the reflected pulse is at intake closing after BDC.  This high reflected pulse is the most important for producing strong intake tuning to help performance. 

• 
The longer the runner, the later the reflected pulse arrives back at the port.  If the runner is too long for a particular RPM, the reflected pulse will arrive very late and the intake valve may have already closed.  Then the engine can not take advantage of it.  All the long runner is doing then is providing a deep, long suction pulse which hurts performance considerably. 


Now, repeat this process changing the intake runner diameter instead of the length.  First, set Runner Length back to its original 5" in the Intake System menu.  This time calculate performance with a .2" smaller diameter and .2" larger diameter intake runner over the runner’s entire length. For these conditions, you must change both the Intake System menu's Runner Diameter and the Cylinder Head(s) menu's Intake Avg Port Diameter.  Table 4.10 gives a summary of the runner modifications and results.  Figure 4.51 shows the plots of InPort Pres and InPort Vel for the different diameter intake runners. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.50 Effect of Changing Intake Runner Length 
Figure 4.51 Effect of Changing Intake Runner Diameter Intake Port (tuning) Pressure Intake Port (tuning) Velocity 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Table 4.10 Summary of Changing Intake Runner Dimensions 
Condition  Baseline  3” Shorter  3” Longer  .2” Smaller  .2” Larger  
Int Runner Length  5  2  8  5  5  
Int Port Dia  1.82  1.82  1.82  1.62  2.02  
Int Runner Dia  1.95  1.95  1.95  1.75  2.15  
Results @ 7500  
Brk Tq  384  358  374  357  376  
Brake HP  549  512  534  510  538  
Vol Eff%  113.8  103.6  108.8  106.2  112.0  
Pumpng Work  -24.4  -15.4  -24.3  -24.3  -22.7  
In Tune Prs  5.6  3.0  6.2  5.5  4.6  
Peak InPort Pres  23.0  20.1  23.8  24.1  21.2  
Peak InPort Pres Location, deg after BDC  60  48  64  68  52  
Peak InPort Vel  624  472  612  852  465  

Table 4.10 shows us: 
• 
In every case, changing the runner length or diameter caused a loss in performance at 7500.  This makes sense as this engine has been optimized for approximately 7500 RPM. 

• 
The highest Brk Tq and Brake HP occurs with the highest Vol Eff, which does not always have the highest In Tune Prs (listed in the RPM data) or Peak In Port Pres (which is Cycle Data).  This shows that where the peak pressure occurs and the shape of the pressure wave is very important also. 

• 
A high InPort Vel by itself is not a good indicator of the best performing runner dimensions for tuning. 


Figures 4.50 and 4.51 show us: 
• 
Peak In Port Pres generally increases as In Port Vel increases or runner length increases. 

• 
The timing of peak In Port Pres (reflected pulse) occurs later as In Port Vel increases or runner length increases. 

• 
Even with optimum tuning, some reverse flow can occur near intake closing. 

• 
In general, for optimum tuning you want In Port Pres as high as possible in the area around intake valve closing.  However, if the peak occurs too close to intake closing, the valve is too far closed to take advantage of it.  The Figures do not show this, but if the peak occurs too far before intake closing, some air will be pushed out before the intake valve closes.  This would be indicated by higher amounts of negative InPort Vel near intake closing. 


Figures 4.52 shows the effect of these different runner dimensions on the whole HP curve.  It points out some general trends for changing intake runner dimensions: 
• 
Making intake runners longer and/or smaller diameter moves the tuning peak and HP peak to a lower RPM. 

• 
Making intake runners shorter and/or larger diameter moves the tuning peak and HP peak to a higher RPM. 


Exhaust Tuning: 
The Engine Analyzer Pro also lets you investigate the effect of exhaust runner (header primary) and collector dimensions on tuning and performance.  As we did in the Intake Tuning section of this example, we will change exhaust runner (header primary) dimensions and watch the effect on port pressures and HP. 
Figure 4.53 shows that as the runner length gets longer, the width of the initial "blowdown" pulse also gets wider.  This blowdown pulse is the loud crack you hear in the exhaust of race engines with early exhaust opening.  After the blowdown pulse, a vacuum pulse will appear, vacuum being a pressure less than atmospheric pressure.  Atmospheric pressure is approximately 15 PSIA.  This vacuum pulse is caused by the reflection of the blowdown pulse from the end of the header pipe  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.53 Effect of Exhaust Header Dimensions on Exhaust  Port (tuning) Pressure 

 Figure 4.54 Effect of Exhaust Header Dimensions on HP 

at the collector.  In a highly tuned engines like this SUPERSTOCK V-6, a strong vacuum pulse during overlap, when both valves are open, produces the following desired effects: 
• 
Clears out the cylinder of any residual exhaust to reduce “contamination” of the fresh incoming intake charge. 

• 
Prevents reversion by keeping the exhaust flowing out of the cylinder and the intake charge flowing into the cylinder. 

• 
Lets the intake charge get a “head start” at filling the cylinder, because the exhaust is sucking the intake charge into the cylinder before piston motion has started to suck the intake charge into the cylinder. 


The larger the valve overlap, the wider the vacuum pulse should be for good exhaust tuning.  This engine has a great deal of overlap, 74 degrees at .050” lift.  Therefore we want a deep, wide vacuum pulse in the area around TDC.  Figure 4.53 shows that both the longer and smaller diameter header pipe produce a very wide “blowdown” pulse, increasing the average exhaust pressure in the overlap area around TDC.  Figure 4.54 shows that both the longer and smaller header primary produce much less HP at 7500 RPM as a result. 
The shorter and larger exhaust headers don’t show much difference in vacuum pulse at TDC at 7500 RPM.  Figure 4.54 shows that they both produce slightly less HP at 7500 RPM, but at RPMs over 7500 they both produce more HP.  If this engine’s reciprocating parts and valve train can handle the higher RPM safely, it may be worth trying larger or shorter headers on this engine. However, remember you will have to rev the engine higher to take advantage of the higher HP.  At RPMs below 7500, the larger and shorter exhaust primaries reduce power. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Figures 4.54 shows the same trends as were shown for intake runners: 
• 
Making exhaust runners longer and/or smaller diameter moves the tuning peak and HP peak to a lower RPM. 

• 
Making exhaust runners shorter and/or larger diameter moves the tuning peak and HP peak to a higher RPM. 


Notes on Intake and Exhaust Tuning: 
Although the Engine Analyzer Pro simulates intake and exhaust tuning pulses in great detail, there are still effects which are not yet completely understood or are simply not being simulated.  These limitations include: 
• 
Temperature effects, which affect the speed at which the pulses are reflected.  Temperatures are affected by fuel type and specific fuel delivery system, manifold, combustion chamber, port and header design, header insulation, etc not simulated by the Pro. 

• 
Specific runner design, like placement of bends, area changes, design of junctions, etc. 

• 
Effects from other cylinders, for example standard V-8 vs 180 degree vs tri-Y header collector designs.  (Some of the effects from other cylinders are simulated in relatively simple way.) 

• 
Effect of runner restriction.  Although the intake and exhaust Runner Flow Coefs can be measured on a flow bench, we do not completely understand how they define the runner's ability to tune.  We do know that freer flowing runners do provide for better tuning, but not the exact relationship. 


Due to these limitations, the Pro (as with most any computer model) can not predict the single best runner design.  However, it is still quite useful for predicting trends and giving approximate runner designs.  For absolute peak performance, these designs would have to be refined with dyno or track testing. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The engine's HP is strongly dependent on the amount of air it can flow, which is strongly dependent on pressure waves in the intake and exhaust runners and ports. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer Pro allows you to simulate intake and exhaust tuning in great detail. 

• 
By plotting intake and exhaust port pressures and runner velocities, you can gain a better understanding of tuning principles. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
For Advanced Users: 
In this example, as with many engine investigations, we made several changes to a spec to see how the engine’s performance curves reacted. The Pro has a built in routine called Chain Calculations which let you program in several (up to 36) changes and have the program do each one automatically, without you being at the computer.  This can be a great convenience. In this example, we will chain 36 changes to the exhaust header primary length and diameter.  On a fairly fast Pentium computer, 36 runs of 12 RPMs could take a half hour or more to run.  While the program is running, you can be doing other work. 
Figure 4.55 
Click on the Calculate Performance button 
Select Yes for Do Chain Calculations 
Click on See Chain Calculation Specs to display menu shown in Figure 4.56 

To run a Chain Calculation, first be sure all specs (except the ones you will change) match the specs of the engine you want to simulate.  Then click on the Calculate Performance button at the Main Menu and select the Yes option for Chain Calculations as shown in Figure 4.55.  Once Yes is selected, click on the Show Chain Specs button to display the Chain Calculation menu shown in Figure 4.56. 
The settings in Figure 4.56 will make 30 runs with 5 settings of exhaust header diameter and 6 settings of exhaust header length.  When finished setting the Chain specs, click on OK, then click on Calculate Performance in the Calculate Performance menu shown in Figure 4.55.  These 30 runs, each consisting of 12 RPMs will take 30 minutes or more to complete.  When they are finished, the results will be displayed as shown in Figure 4.57.  Click on the Graph button and you can obtain either a torque or HP graph.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Chapter 4 Examples 
Because Chain Calculations generate so many runs and potentially several megabytes of data, only torque and HP data is saved or displayed.  Therefore Chain Calculations are most useful to do quick trials of specs and see the effect on performance.  For detailed investigations, where you may want to check detonation, check valve toss, do Cycle Data graphs, you must use single calculations as shown in the first part of this example. 
The graph of Figure 4.58 can appear very confusing, especially as printed here in black and white.  However, you can click on any run name in the graph legend and the corresponding graph will flash. This way you can see how each combination compares to all the others.  If we do this, the combinations which appear the best in the RPM range around 7500 are: 
• 1.9” x 26” 
• 
2.1” x 26” (this combination is one of the best up to over 8000 RPM) 

• 
2.1” x 31” (the original or 


baseline header) • 2.3” x 31” 
As shown in the first part of this example, it looks promising to try a slightly larger diameter or slightly shorter header primary, especially if the engine can rev safely to over 7500 RPM. 
Chain calculations can also be saved for later reference, by clicking on File as shown in Figure 
4.57. Then click on Save Current Test Results to Disk.  Chain results can be saved to any directory, but have a .CHN file extension  instead of  a DAT extension of single run test files. 
Conclusions: 
• 
The Chain Calculation feature lets you run several tests automatically to find combinations which look promising. 

• 
Chain Calculations only allow for torque or HP output.  Therefore, for detailed investigations of other operating conditions like detonation, valve toss, cylinder pressure, etc, you must use single run tests. 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
Background: 
The Engine Analyzer Pro was developed as a: 
• 
Learning aid for those who want to better understand internal combustion engines. 

• 
Tool to help predict effects of certain engine modifications for engine builders, engineers, racers, and performance enthusiasts. 

• 
"Theoretical Dynamometer" to allow anyone to try things which are too expensive, difficult, or impossible with a real engine. 


The Engine Analyzer Pro will provide you an engineering estimate of what should occur when general modifications are made based on internal combustion engine theory and general physics and thermodynamics. By seeing all the specifications which go into the calculated results, you may have a false sense that the computer knows your engine exactly, what manufacturer's intake manifold and carburetor are installed, who ported the heads, the exact cam profile.  Actually the computer does not know if the specifications are for a flat head Ford or a Honda Formula 1 engine. 
A good analogy to the Engine Analyzer Pro is a flow bench.  A flow bench can not predict exact torque and HP curves, but is still a vital tool for engine development.  In the same way, use the Engine Analyzer Pro results as a guide, as a second opinion of how your engine should perform under near optimum conditions. 
Many users of engine simulation programs do not understand their true value.  If you simply want to know how much HP a particular combination of specs will produce, our Engine Analyzer EZ can do a good job with only 20 inputs.  However, if you want to know, “What will happen if I make the intake runner 1” longer?”, the EZ version can not do it.  The EZ version does not have an input for runner length so you can not add 1” to the runner length.  The true value of engine simulations is the ability to accurately check for trends like “If I lengthen the intake runner 1 inch, this will happen.”  The ability to accurately predict trends from modifications has been greatly improved in the new Windows Pro v2.1. 
Iterations: 
Before we talk about accuracy, it is important for you to understand the types of calculations going on inside the Engine Analyzer Pro and other sophisticated simulation programs.  A simple engine program could involve calculating torque from volumetric efficiency: 
Torque = K x engine displacement x volumetric efficiency 
Where: K is a constant which includes many assumptions 
You enter a volumetric efficiency and obtain a torque value.  The answer you obtain on the left side of the equation has no effect on the inputs on the right side of the equations.  (Some rather expensive programs are based on an equation no more detailed or complex than this.  See "Other Engine Simulation Programs" in this Appendix.) 
However, lets look at a simplified version of the Pro’s equation which calculates the temperature rise of intake air as it passes through the intake port. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Final Temp = Intake Temp + K x (Final Temp + Intake Temp) 
In this case the "Final Temp" answer you get on the left side has an effect on the inputs to the equation on the right.  The only way to solve equations like this is through "iterations".  Iteration is a process where you assume an answer, use that answer in the right side of the equation, calculate the actual answer and see if the actual answer is "close enough" to the answer you assumed.  For example: 
Iteration Process: For this example, use above equation with K=.3, Intake Temp = 80 
A  Assume Final Temp is 145 degrees  
B  Calculate Final Temp: 80 + .3 x ( 145 + 80 ) = 147.5  
C  Are assumed Final Temp and Calculated Final Temp Close Enough (within 1 degree) ?  
No, so do again using new Final Temp answer  
A'  Assume Final Temp is 147.5 degrees  
B'  Calculate Final Temp: 80 + .3 x ( 147.5 + 80 ) = 148.25  
C'  Are assumed Final Temp and Calculated Final Temp Close Enough (within 1 degree) ?  
Yes, so an approximate answer is:  
Final Temp = 148.25 degrees  

If "close enough" was 3 degrees, our first answer of 147.5 degrees would have been good enough.  If "close enough" was .1 degree, it may require many more calculations to arrive at an answer which is "close enough".  If the equation is very complex and the inputs are an unusual combination, no answer may be reached no matter how many times the calculation is performed.  This is called "not converging on a solution".   
Making the tolerance "close enough" small will produce more exact answers but will require more calculation time.  Performance Trends has selected tolerance bands for the Pro's many iterations which give good accuracy with reasonable calculation times. 
Because many of the equations within the Engine Analyzer Pro must be solved by iterations, there is no one exact answer.  All calculations are an approximation.  For example, do not be alarmed if an Intake Valve Flow Area is calculated as 200.4 for "straight up" cam timing and as 200.8 with 4 degrees of cam advance.  These numbers are close enough that they should be considered equal.  Advancing the cam should not and did not change Intake Valve Flow Area. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Correlation with Dynamometer Data: 
First we must say that no engine simulation, even those used by the Big 3 automakers, replace dyno testing.  Although the Pro’s results can match your dyno almost exactly for some engines, for others with different combustion chamber design, A/F distribution, carb fuel metering, etc, the trends and power levels could be off. 
The Engine Analyzer Pro was validated using dynamometer data from many different engines, from small 5 HP Briggs & Strattons to 500 CID Pro Stocks.  In general, the Engine Analyzer Pro's torque and HP results compared within +7% of the actual dynamometer data at most RPMs.  For example, if the Engine Analyzer Pro predicted 400 ft lbs of peak torque, the actual engine would have from 372 to 428 ft lbs from dynamometer tests.  The agreement is best near the torque and HP peaks. 
We do not quote an improvement in accuracy over our simpler, standard Engine Analyzer program.  Then you may wonder why go through all the extra work gathering specs and extra expense for the Pro. 
• 
First, the standard Engine Analyzer is designed to work with fairly standard parts, typical cam profiles, turbos, superchargers, etc.  In many cases, the standard version makes many assumptions for you so you may not know what types of parts it is using. 

• 
Second, the Pro's more detailed analysis makes it more reliable at accurately predicting trends from modifications.  At approximately every 0.2 degrees of crank rotation, it calculates intake and exhaust valve flow area, port pressure, flow through each valve, etc. Therefore, if you make a change to cam timing, valve flow, etc., the Pro' can more reliably predict the effect on performance.  The accuracy of predicting trends has been significantly improved in Version 2.1 for Windows. 

• 
Third, the Pro has many more inputs so you can simulate much more detailed engine modifications.  For example, you can: 

• 
Investigate the effect of different cam profiles on performance, valve toss or pushrod loads. 

• 
Determine how modifications affect intake port pressure, cylinder pressure, spark knock or required jet size. 

• 
Check the effect of various cylinder head flow curves on performance, reversion or tuning. 

• 
Etc. 




One must also remember that dynamometer testing is not an "exact science".  How many times have you seen magazine stories of an engine dyno tested to produce 400 HP.  But when the engine is installed in a car, it only runs 100 MPH in the quarter mile.  Similar cars with 400 HP are running 110 MPH, so the dyno numbers are obviously too high.  Significant variability exists from run to run, day to day and especially from dyno facility to dyno facility.  Therefore, the dyno data you are comparing to the Engine Analyzer Pro results may be in error more than the program.  See Appendix 4. 
Figures A.1 - A.3 give some comparisons between Engine Analyzer Pro simulations and actual dynamometer runs testing various modifications.  Figure A.4 show pushrod forces simulated by the Pro versus loads measured with instrumented pushrods. Figure A.5 shows simulated intake runner pressure pulses versus those actually measured in the intake runner.  These examples will give you some feel for the accuracy to be expected from the program. 
The examples shown here compare predicted results from the older DOS Pro.  The Windows Pro v2.1 has equal or improved accuracy in most all situations and would show equal or better correlation as the graphs shown here. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

Figure A.2: Predicted Effect of Header Change From Pro Versus Measured On Dynamometer 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

Figure A.5: Predicted Pushrod Force From Pro Versus Measured with Strain Gauged Pushrod 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Major Assumptions: 
To make the Engine Analyzer Pro, and the specifications which describe the engine, containable on a personal computer, several simplifying assumptions are made which are listed below.  Other approximations and assumptions exist as identified in Section 
1.3 A Word of Caution and scattered throughout this manual.  See Assumptions in the Index. 
• 
All cylinders and runners in the engine are identical. 

• 
Spark occurs at exactly the same time for every combustion cycle.  There are no misfires or "slow burns". 

• 
For Gasoline simulations, the energy released during combustion is based on a fuel called octane, with a heating value of approximately 19,000 BTU/lb.  For Drag Racing Gasoline, the heating value is slightly higher.  For Alcohol, the heating value is 8,600 BTU/LB. 

• 
For Gasoline and Drag Race Gas simulations, the program assumes that the fuel’s vapor pressure (tendency to vaporize and atomize well) drops with increased Octane.  Therefore, you may see A/F Mxtr Qlty drop as you specify higher fuel Octane. 

• 
The frictional drag from Short Block specs like Cooling Fan Type, Water Pump & Drive, etc increase with increased engine displacement.  For example, if you specify a stroke which is 20% longer to the Engine Analyzer Pro, displacement increases 20% and so does the friction from Cooling Fan Type. 

• 
Intake and exhaust tuning are very complex simulations as identified in Appendix 3.  Small changes in air temperature, surface temperature within the air tracts and effects from other cylinders make exact tuning simulations impossible.  See Appendix 3 and Example 4.5 for more complete tuning assumptions. 

• 
Figure A.6 is a simplified block diagram of the "engine" within the Engine Analyzer Pro. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 



Appendix 2: Summary of 4 Cycle, Internal Combustion Engine Theory 
Most performance enthusiasts know the 4 processes which occur in the 4 cycle, internal combustion engine, namely:
 -Intake 
-Compression 
-Combustion and Expansion 
-Exhaust 
However, many do not fully understand the theory of how these processes make HP, or how you change these processes to make more HP. 
Let's look more closely at the Combustion and Expansion part of the cycle, the portion of the cycle which actually makes power. Four cycle, IC (internal combustion) engines produce power from the chemical energy stored in the fuel they burn.  This stored 
energy is released when the fuel burns in the cylinder with oxygen in the air. The heat which is released, heats the air which is trapped in the cylinder, raising its pressure which pushes on the piston and turns the crankshaft.  This whole process can be thought of as the "explosion" which occurs when the spark plug fires.  
Let's examine the chemical energy in the fuel which is released in the engine.  If we look at the engine as just a "black box" (Figure A.7); we do not know what goes on inside, except that fuel goes in and horsepower comes out.  We can calculate the amount of horsepower the fuel contains if we know the flow rate of the fuel and the chemical energy of the fuel. 

Example of "Black Box" Engine 
Fuel Flow Rate = 40 lbs/hr Chemical Energy in Fuel = 19,000 BTU/lb Conversion factor: 1 HP = 2544 BTU/hr 
        HP into "Black Box": 
(1) 40 lbs/hr x 19,000 BTU/lb = 299 HP 2544 BTU/hr 
If we knew the efficiency of this "black box" engine at converting chemical energy into mechanical energy (HP), we could calculate its HP output.  For this example, let's say the "black box" engine is 25% efficient. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(2) 
Efficiency = HP out x 100% HP in 


        Filling in the information we know into eq (2): 
25% = HP out x 100% 299 HP 
        Rearranging terms: 
HP out = 25% x 299 = 75 HP 100% 
        Power out of "Black Box" engine: 
(3) F.F.R x C.E.F x Eff = HP out 2544 
Where: F.F.R. = Fuel Flow Rate, lb/hr 
C.E.F. = Chemical Energy of Fuel, BTU/lb Eff = Total Engine Efficiency 
Using this simple logic, if the efficiency stays the same, all we have to do is pump more fuel into the engine to produce more power. For example, remove the carburetor and dump the fuel directly down the intake manifold.  You could pump the gas tank dry in a matter of minutes, but we all know that the engine would probably produce no power at all.  The energy in the fuel can only be released if there is enough oxygen available to burn it completely and the fuel and air are well mixed in the right proportions.    
Under perfect conditions, it takes about 14.6 lbs of air to completely burn 1 lb of fuel (an air/fuel ratio of 14.6:1, or A/F = 14.6)*. Under these conditions, extra fuel over the 14.6 A/F is wasted and can severely reduce power if extremely rich (A/F ratios richer than 11.0).  This wasting of fuel decreases efficiency "Eff".  Therefore, to get more fuel into the engine to produce more HP, you must also get more air in so the fuel can burn completely.  From this information, we can add something to the equation for the "black box" engine, that HP does not depend on fuel flow, but more importantly on air flow.  We will replace the "Fuel Flow Rate" with "Air Flow Rate / Air/Fuel Ratio". 
        HP from "Black Box" Engine: 
(4) A.F.R x  C.E.F. x Eff = HP out A/F 2544 
Where: A.F.R. = Air Flow Rate, lb/hr A/F = Air Fuel Ratio 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Although it's easy to get extra fuel into the engine, it is difficult to get more air (oxygen) into the engine.  The amount of oxygen the engine takes in for a given amount of time depends on: 
• 
The amount of air the engine can take into the cylinder(s) on one Intake Stroke. 

• 
The # of intake strokes in the given amount of time. 

• 
The density of the air that enters the cylinder. 

• 
The amount of oxygen in the air, which is always 21% , unless you are using nitrous oxide or a fuel which contains oxygen like Alcohol.  


The amount of air the engine can take in on one Intake Stroke depends on the number and the size of the cylinders.  This is the engine's displacement or CID (cubic inch displacement). 
The # of intake strokes in a given amount of time is the engine's speed or RPM/2.  RPM is divided by 2 because 4 cycle engines ingest air only once for each 2 revolutions. 
The density of the air that enters the cylinder depends on many engine design characteristics, for example intake system restrictions, cam timing, etc.  A number which describes how dense the air is which enters the cylinder is the Volumetric Efficiency, or Vol Eff % as it is called by the Engine Analyzer Pro.  See Vol Eff % in Section 2.8.  These 3 items are what determine the Air Flow Rate in equation (4). 
Although 14.6 A/F is the perfect ratio chemically, not every oxygen molecule in the air will "find" a fuel molecule to react (burn) with. Therefore, since air flow is the factor limiting power, extra fuel is added to better ensure every oxygen molecule in the air can find a fuel molecule.  For this reason, actual engines run at 11.5-13.5 A/F to obtain  maximum power. 
(5)A.F.R. = CID x RPM x 60 x VE % x .0764 1728 2 100% 
Where: CID is the cubic inch displacement of the engine RPM is the engine speed VE % is the volumetric efficiency in % (for the air which actually stays in the 
    cylinder) 1728 converts cubic inches to cubic feet 60 converts RPM to Revs per Hour .0764 is an approximate density of air (lb/cu ft) 100 is to convert VE % to a simple fraction 
        Multiplying all the constants together: 
(6) A.F.R. = CID x RPM x VE % x .00001326 
        Substituting equation (6) into equation (4): 
(7) HP out = CID X RPM x VE % x .00001326 x C.E.F. x Eff A/F 2544 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Now, lets look at the last term in the equation, "Eff".  This efficiency term is actually talking about 2 separate efficiencies: 
Thermal Efficiency or Thermal Eff, % in the Pro’s results :  The thermal efficiency is an engineering term that describes how efficiently the combustion and expansion process makes use of the heat energy which pushes on the piston during the expansion stroke.  Explaining thermal efficiency can get quite complex for this discussion.  However, a simple illustration of thermal inefficiency is the heat left in the exhaust gasses.  If the thermal efficiency of the engine were higher, more of the heat of combustion would be used to push on the piston, less heat would be exhausted from the cylinder, and the exhaust would be cooler.  The thermal efficiency is quite difficult to improve beyond the range of .40 (40%), with most engines having a thermal efficiency of .25 (25%) to .35 (35%). 
Mechanical Efficiency or Mech Eff, % in the Pro’s results:  Up to this point we have talked only about the amount of work the burned gases or "explosion" does on the top of the piston.  This work done on the piston is called Indicated Work or Indicated HP.  However, not all this Indicated Work or HP gets out of the engine to the crankshaft.  Some of the HP is used up in forms which can be grouped under the title of "Friction" which include: 
Where HP is lost to Friction: 
• 
Rubbing, mechanical friction from piston rings rubbing on the bore, bearings rubbing on journals, lifters rubbing on cam lobes, etc. 

• 
Required accessories like oil pump, water pump, cooling fan, etc.  (The cam and valve train could be included under this category.) 


Rubbing and accessory friction can be illustrated by removing the spark plugs, putting a torque wrench on the crankshaft bolt and turning the engine by hand.  The torque required to turn the engine represents torque which could be used to power the vehicle if the engine had no friction.   
The work or power lost to friction is called Friction Work or Friction HP and the work which actually appears at the crankshaft is called Brake Work or Brake HP.  See Figure A.8. 
Brake HP = Indicated HP - Friction HP 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
The HP lost to friction can also be expressed as an efficiency: 
Mechanical Efficiency = Brake HPIndicated HP 
Mechanical Efficiencies can be in the range of .00 (0%) up to .90 (90%) or higher.  A good illustration of Mech Eff % = .00 is when an engine is idling, clutch disengaged or transmission in neutral.  All the HP being generated by the fuel and the "explosions" in the cylinders are producing no BRK HP at the crankshaft.  This fuel is being completely wasted, just to overcome the engine's own friction and keep it running. 
Multiplying the Thermal Efficiency and the Mechanical Efficiency together is a better way of describing the "Eff" term in the previous equations:
        Eff = Thermal Eff % x Mech Eff % 
Substituting this relationship into equation (7) we finally get the formula for HP of an engine: 
(8)HP out = CID x RPM x Vol Eff% x .00001326 x C.E.F. x TEFF % x MEFF % A/F 2544 
Combining all the constants together, (assuming 14.6 A/F and dividing twice by 100 so TEFF % and MEFF % can be in percents) you get: 
Detailed Equation for HP of a 4 Cycle, I.C. Engine 
(9) HP out = CID x RPM x VOLEFF% x C.E.F. x TEFF % x MEFF % 28 E12 
Note: 28 E12 is "scientific notation" for 28,000,000,000,000.  Your calculator will probably       not let you enter 28,000,000,000,000, so use the "scientific notation" method. 
Now, for the important stuff; what is equation (9) telling us.  It's telling us that to make more HP (to raise the value of the left side of the equation) you must raise the value of something on the right side of the equation.  Listed below are these factors from the right side of the equation with some explanation, and a list of some specifications from the Engine Analyzer Pro which effect that particular factor. 
CID: The cubic inch displacement of the engine: 
Bore, inches Stroke, inches # Of cylinders 
RPM: The engine speed: 
Stroke (the shorter the stroke, the higher the RPM limit) Rod length (the longer the rod, the lower the piston Gs) Anything which lightens reciprocating components extends safe RPM limit. Other short block specs which affect strength of rotating components Valve Train Specs which allow high revving without valve toss 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
VOLEFF%: Volumetric efficiency: 
Most cylinder Head(s) Specs             Most Intake System Specs             All Exhaust System Specs             All Cam Specs Most Supercharger Specs             Weather Conditions and Nitrous Oxide under Calculation Conditions  
C.E.F.: Chemical Energy of the Fuel: 
            Gasoline/Alcohol Possibly Nitrous Oxide 
[Note: This is where alcohol and nitro-methane burning engines make additional power over gas engines.  When  burned, these fuels release more energy per pound of air than gasoline.  Nitrous oxide, on the other hand, is only a way to get more oxygen into the cylinder so more fuel can be burned.  Technically, nitrous oxide is improving VE % by supplying "air" with more oxygen (for example 30%) rather than the 21% oxygen typical of normal air.]
 TEFF %: Thermal efficiency: 
Compression Ratio Spark Advance Specs Piston Coatings Combustion Chamber Design and Coating Cylinder Head Material 
MEFF %: Mechanical efficiency: 
Most Short Block Specs             Coolant Temp (effects oil temp and therefore oil viscosity) Supercharger Specs (for centrifugal or Roots type, belt driven superchargers) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 3: Intake and Exhaust Tuning 
Intake Inertia Tuning 
The intake process of a 4-cycle engine is a cyclic process.  During the intake stroke, the piston accelerates a column of fresh air from rest to speeds of up to 1000 ft/sec and then back to rest in only a few thousandths of a second.  Decelerating the inertia of this column of air at intake valve closing results in high pressures at the intake valve.  This high pressure forces additional fresh charge into the cylinder, like a supercharger, resulting in higher volumetric efficiency and torque.  This condition is called inertia tuning.  See Figure A.9. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
 A good analogy of inertia tuning is the "water hammer" effect in old plumbing when you quickly close a running faucet.  (New plumbing has "trapped air shock absorbers" to reduce this effect.)  Decelerating the column of water in the pipes by closing the valve causes a sharp pressure rise that literally "rattle the pipes".  This is the same situation as when the intake valve closes.   
Inertia tuning is responsible for an increase in volumetric efficiency and torque over a broad RPM range.  See Figure A.10.  Inertia tuning is optimum when the rise in intake runner pressure is high over a broad range of the valve opening period, especially around intake valve closing.  This usually occurs when In Tune Prs is highest in the RPM data test results.  See Example 4.5. 
Intake Resonance Tuning 
Once the intake valve has closed, this pressure pulsation continues to be reflected back and forth in the intake runner until the intake valve opens and the process starts again.  If a high pressure peak of this reflected wave is at the intake valve during valve overlap, it can blow the burnt exhaust gasses out of the clearance volume into the exhaust.  This results in additional gains in volumetric efficiency.   
However, if a vacuum peak arrives at the intake valve during overlap, additional exhaust gasses will be drawn into the intake runner. This process hurts volumetric efficiency since the cylinder must first draw in that "blown back" exhaust from the intake runner before it starts to induct the fresh, power producing air charge.  The timing of this reflected wave to aid scavenging is called resonance tuning. 
For typical runner lengths (6-20 inches) and RPMs (3000-10000 RPM), the resonant pressure wave is reflected several times between intake strokes.  Therefore, at some RPMs positive intake tuning occurs and negative tuning occurs at other RPMs.  Resonance tuning is responsible for the "wiggle" seen in torque curves for engines with high valve overlap.  For engines with low overlap, resonant tuning has much less effect.  Also, each time this wave is reflected it looses some strength, so at lower RPMs or for shorter runner lengths resonance tuning is negligible.  The Engine Analyzer Pro detailed tuning simulations will show these gains or losses in volumetric efficiency and performance for resonance tuning. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Intake Secondary Tuning 
Inertia and Resonance tuning deal with pressure waves present only in the "primary" intake runner.  Secondary tuning deals with pressure waves present in a plenum and "secondary" runner ahead of the "primary" intake runner.  A good example of secondary intake tuning is the dual plane, V-8 intake manifold.  Most engine builders realize that a dual plane will produce good torque at a lower RPM than a single plane.  The question is "Why?".   

Figure A.11 is a simplified view of a dual plane, 8 cylinder intake manifold.  It consists of the primary runners, a plenum, and a secondary runner. In the case of a carburetor, the secondary runner is the carburetor barrel(s) which supply each plane.  For fuel injected engines, the secondary runner is the throttle body and any piping before and after the throttle body. 
A single plane, 8 cylinder intake also has a plenum and a secondary runner, but it does not display secondary tuning.  The reason is that when 8 cylinders all draw on the same plenum, there is much overlap of the pulses.  These pulses look more like a constant suction than pulses.  With no defined pulses on the plenum or secondary runner, there is no secondary tuning.  In general, if more than 4 cylinders are drawing on a plenum, there will be little secondary tuning. 
Then why use a single plane intake?  This lack of pulses on the carb is one reason the single plane intake is less restrictive at high RPM.  A carburetor is less restrictive to a constant flow than pulsing flow.  Also, secondary tuning helps at low RPM due to the complex interaction of waves produced in the secondary runners.  These complex waves generally "mess up" the simple Inertia and Resonance tuning waves at their tuned RPM (generally high RPM).  To summarize, single plane intakes provide better high RPM tuning and are less restrictive. 
Secondary tuning is treated in a more simplistic way by the Engine Analyzer Pro than inertia or resonance tuning.  The RPM where secondary tuning will be most significant is strongly influenced by the Plenum Specs in the Intake System menu.  These specs include the length and area of the secondary runner or carburetor, and plenum volume.  Where the # of Cylinders in the Short Block menu is high relative to the Manifold Type chosen, the secondary runner length and area specs will be disabled as there will be no secondary tuning. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Exhaust Resonance Tuning 
Things are much more violent in the exhaust runner due to the sudden rush of high pressure exhaust out the exhaust valve when it first opens.  In fact most of the exhaust is expelled during this first rush called "blow down".  That leaves relatively little for the piston to push out during the exhaust stroke. 
Due to this violent "blow down", exhaust tuning is not significantly affected by the previous cycle as in intake resonance tuning.  Exhaust resonance tuning is caused by the reflections of the "blow down" pulse in the exhaust runner while the exhaust valve is open. If one of the negative, vacuum pulses arrives at the exhaust valve during overlap, it benefits performance by: 
• 
Clearing out the cylinder of any residual exhaust to reduce “contamination” of the fresh incoming intake charge. 

• 
Preventing reversion by keeping the exhaust flowing out of the cylinder and the intake charge flowing into the cylinder. 

• 
Letting the intake charge get a “head start” at filling the cylinder, because the exhaust is sucking the intake charge into the cylinder before the piston has moved enough to suck the intake charge into the cylinder. 


With high overlap camshafts and good resonance tuning on the intake side, it is possible to completely scavenge the clearance volume of residual exhaust.  This provides for very high volumetric efficiencies, and possibly "short circuiting".  Short circuiting is when fresh intake charge passes directly through the clearance volume out the exhaust during overlap.  Obviously this wastes fuel, but to produce optimum power that may not be important. 
As on the intake side, exhaust resonance tuning will produce torque gains when a vacuum pulse arrives at the exhaust valve during overlap. However, a torque loss will be produced when a positive pulse arrives. 
As runner velocities increase (smaller pipe diameters), the shape of the exhaust pulses change. 
• 
The primary blowdown pulse gets wider and the arrival of the 1st vacuum pulse gets delayed. 

• 
The amplitude (height) of the blowdown pulse gets higher and generally the suction of the 1st vacuum pulse gets stronger also. 


Therefore, the combination of pipe length and diameter are important to determine what pipe should be used for a particular applications. At Performance Trends we are still trying to better understand the details of intake and exhaust tuning.  As we improve our understanding and capabilities, we will add these improvements to our software. 
Additional Factors Affecting Tuning: 
All tuning factors are affected by temperature, since temperature affects the speed of sound.  The speed of sound in the runner influences how fast the pulsation’s are reflected.  Since temperatures are affected by so many factors not simulated by the Engine Analyzer Pro, tuning effects can only be estimates. 
The pulsation’s produced by other cylinders can affect tuning pulsation’s.  This is especially true at points where neither the intake or exhaust are at peak tuning, or "off design" points.  These influences from other cylinders are simulated only very simply by the Engine Analyzer Pro. 
Low restriction runners (high Runner Flow Coef) provide better tuning effects.  However, the exact relationship between Runner Flow Coef and tuning strength is not completely developed.  Therefore, you are advised to try a range of Runner Flow Coefs for your simulation.  For example, if you measure a Runner Flow Coef to be 2.1, also try the calculations at 1.6 and 2.6. If performance changes significantly, you know tuning is critical.  However, you are not guaranteed that the estimated performance at Runner Flow Coef = 2.1 is the best estimate of the engine's actual performance.  (Exhaust tuning is not significantly affected by changes in exhaust Runner Flow Coef.  This  a change in the Windows version 2.1.) 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 



Appendix 4: "Fine Tuning" Torque & HP Curves 
The Engine Analyzer Pro was primarily designed to illustrate basic Internal Combustion Engine Theory and give estimates of the "pay back" of certain engine modifications.  See Appendix 1.  If you are using the Engine Analyzer Pro program to help you make the right decisions for modifying a particular engine and you have dynamometer performance data for that engine, you should first get the Pro calculated results to agree with the dynamometer data.  
The suggestions which follow will help "dial in" the engine specifications to match your dynamometer data.  These suggestions will also help you tune your engine to give the desired amount of torque or HP at a desired RPM.  However, do not assume that just because the Pro's results matches the dyno's results that all the Pro's inputs or predictions are correct.  It is always possible you have overestimated some specs and underestimated others. 
Also check Example 4.5 and Appendix 3 for how to adjust tuning effects, which can dramatically alter the torque and HP curve. 
A new feature in V2.1 for Windows is the Analysis report, where the computer makes several recommendations based on your desired HP peak RPM and general type of engine you are building. See Analysis Report in Section 3.2. 
When creating any engine file for a particular engine, it is best to start with an existing file which most closely resembles that engine.  Then modify all the specifications to match that engine for the things which you can measure or you know for certain. 
For other specifications like Runner Flow Coef, Exhaust System CFM Rating, etc you may not have data to make a calculation.  Estimate these values as best you can from the tables or equations provided in Chapter 2.  Calculate performance and compare the Engine Analyzer Pros results with your engine's actual dynamometer results (or your desired torque and HP objectives). 
First, compare the Pro's secondary RPM data results (not torque or HP) to that which has been measured on the dynamometer, 
i.e. air flow in Actual CFM, Fuel Flow, Motoring HP, Int Vac, Exh Pres and Mach #. 
Actual CFM 
Actual CFM is the volume of air flowing into the engine.  If the dynamometer data has air flow readings, try to match the Actual CFM readings of the Pro's results.  Most dynamometer equipment reads out directly in Actual CFM.  Actual CFM air flow can be increased by several means, depending on the RPM where the increase is needed. 
• 
To increase CFM at low RPM (with little effect at higher RPM): 

• 
Reduce Intake Heat to the Manifold in the Intake System menu to allow less heat to be transferred to the intake charge. 

• 
Reduce coolant temp, deg F to allow less heat to be transferred to the intake charge. 

• 
Specify a smaller turbo Turbine Nzzl Dia or higher Belt Ratio if supercharged or turbocharged. 

• 
To increase CFM at low RPM (with little effect at higher RPM), cont: 

• 
Adjust runner lengths to account for temperature and tuning variations. 

• 
Adjust intake Runner Flow Coefs to alter strength of tuning. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

• 
To increase CFM at high RPM (with little effect at lower RPM): 

• 
Reduce any intake or exhaust flow restrictions, or increase flow ratings, i.e. Intake System Total CFM Rating, Runner Flow Coef, Exhaust CFM Rating. 

• 
Adjust runner lengths to account for temperature and tuning variations. 

• 
Adjust intake Runner Flow Coefs to alter strength of tuning. 

• 
Increase Roots Supercharger Vol/Rev, Centrifugal Island CFM, Turbocharger Island CFM, higher Belt Ratio, or set a higher Boost Limit if supercharged or  turbocharged. 

• 
To increase CFM at low RPM and reduce CFM at high RPM: 

• 
Increase Cam Advance 

• 
Decrease any of the cam timing specs, especially the Intake Centerline or Intake Duration. 

• 
Decrease intake or exhaust Valve Flow Coef or Flow Table readings. 

• 
Specify longer length and smaller diameter intake and exhaust runners. 

• 
Adjust runner lengths to account for temperature and tuning variations. 

• 
Adjust intake Runner Flow Coefs to alter strength of tuning. 

• 
Specify smaller valve diameters. 

• 
To increase CFM in the mid range: 

• 
Specify Secondary Throttles as None or Mechanical. 

• 
Adjust runner lengths to account for temperature and tuning variations. 

• 
Adjust intake Runner Flow Coefs to alter strength of tuning. 

• 
Specify short duration or early intake closing cam events, but with high tappet lift or high rocker arm ratios. 


Fuel Flow 
Fuel flow will generally follow air flow (Actual CFM) if the A/F is constant.  If the dynamometer data includes fuel flow in lbs/hr and an actual A/F measurement based on exhaust gas analysis, calculate dynamometer air flow as follows:
 Actual CFM = Dyna Fuel Flow (lb/hr) x Dyna A/F x .218 
Now you can use the Actual CFM rules to make dynamometer and Engine Analyzer Pro air flows match. 
If the dynamometer data does not include a measured A/F, then assume your engine is running at 12.5, just as the Pro assumes.  Use the same rules as listed under CFM to get the Pro’s fuel flow to match the dynamometer fuel flow.  For example, if the Pro's results need more fuel in the midrange to match the dynamometer results, try specifying Secondaries as None or Mechanical as listed under "To increase CFM in the mid range". 
Motoring HP 
If the dynamometer your engine is tested on can "motor" the engine (spin the engine over at high speed with spark and fuel off), the dynamometer data should include the measured motoring friction HP.  This data should be taken with oil and coolant at operating temperature and WOT (wide open throttle).  If this data is available, compare it to the Pro's Motoring HP.  Motoring HP from the Pro should match relatively well with motoring HP from a dynamometer. 
If the measured motoring HP is lower, increase the value of the Short Block specs which increase friction, like Piston Skirt, Bearing Size, Cooling Fan Type, Water Pump & Drive, or Windage. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Int Vac 
To the Engine Analyzer Pro, Int Vac is the intake vacuum after the carb or throttle body during the intake stroke.  Intake vacuum measurements on a dynamometer are an average over all 4 strokes.  Therefore, dynamometer data will (and should) show less vacuum than the Pro's results, especially for individual runner intakes or engines with less than 3 cylinders.  However, if the dynamometer data shows more vacuum than the Pro, you may want to increase the Pro's vacuum by reducing Total CFM Rating in the Intake System menu. 
Exh Pres 
Exh Pres is calculated by the Engine Analyzer Pro so as to correlate well with dynamometer exhaust pressure measurements.  If the dynamometer data shows more pressure than the Pro, you may want to increase the Pro's back pressure by reducing Exhaust System CFM Rating. 
Mach # 
Although you can not measure Mach # with a dynamometer test, it can be measured on a flow bench.  Accurate flow bench data will give accurate flow coefficients, which are key for accurate Mach #s.  Without significant tuning effects, severely restrictive runners, carb or exhaust system, the Mach # primarily dictates torque and HP peaks.  The torque peak will occur at a Mach # of approximately .35-.4 and the HP peak at a Mach # of about .45-.55.  For example: 
Example of Adjusting Torque Peak Using Mach # 
• 
The dynamometer data show (or you require) a torque peak at 5500 RPM 

• 
The Engine Analyzer calculates a Mach # of .48 at 5500 RPM 

• 
You should try to lower the Mach # to .4 at 5500 by providing: 

• 
More intake cam duration or lift 

• 
Larger intake valve area (increase Valve Diameter or # Valves/Cylinder) 

• 
Improved intake air flow (increase Valve Flow Coef or Runner Flow Coef) 

• 
Decrease Bore or Stroke for the same size head 




Brk Tq and Brake HP 
If you match up the secondary information as shown previously, ideally the torque and HP will automatically match.  However, this may not happen or perhaps some secondary information is not available from the dynamometer data.  Therefore you are left with matching dynamometer brake torque and HP with Brk Tq and Brake HP from the Engine Analyzer Pro. 
Since torque and HP are largely a function of air flow, follow the rules outlined under the Actual CFM category.  That is, if the Engine Analyzer Pro needs more torque at low RPM, apply the rules under "To increase CFM at low RPM (with little effect at higher RPM):", for example "Reduce Intake Heat to the Manifold in the Intake System menu". 
The other possible avenue which has a large impact on Brk Tq and Brake HP is Motoring HP.  If the Pro results show significantly more HP at higher RPM, try increasing Motoring HP as discussed previously. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Differences in Dynamometer Testing Methods: 
Variations in dynamometer testing procedures can produce significant difference in measured torque and HP.  Some dynamometer tests try to simulate actual vehicle installations, some go for "maximum possible HP".  Table A1 shows the differences between typical vehicle installation and dynamometer installation for various Engine Analyzer Pro specifications. 
The Calculation Conditions for some engine files reflect vehicle installations using the SAE (Society of Automobile Engineers) standard weather conditions for rating engine power, per SAE Procedure J-1349.  However, dynamometer tests going for "maximum possible HP" for racing engines use a different set of standard conditions which result in approximately 4% more power. These "Other Std Conditions" are also typical of the dynamometer conditions used in the 1960s by the automobile manufacturers, which tended to "over rate" an engine's power. 
Table A1. Showing the Difference Between Typical Vehicle and Dynamometer Installations 
Engine Analyzer Specs  Vehicle  Dynamometer  
Engine Specifications  
Cooling Fan Type  Actual  None  
Water Pump & Drive  Actual  None  
Type of Int Heat  Actual  Actual or Reduced Heat  
Exh Header Dia  Actual  (see note 3)  
Exh Header Length  Actual  (see note 3)  
Exh System CFM Rating  Actual  
Calculation Conditions  
Intake Air Temp, deg F  77  60  
Dew Point, Deg F  49  32  
Barometric Pressure, “Hg  29.6  29.92  
Elevation, ft  0  0  
Coolant Temp, Deg F  Actual  Low, i.e. 140-160  

Note 1: Typically an electric motor or water pressure is used to circulate coolant, eliminating water pump losses on dynamometer tests. Note 2: Occasionally the crossover is blocked and the coolant is cooler to obtain optimum torque and HP. Note 3: Typically headers are installed with no exhaust system to obtain optimum torque and HP. 
In general, production engines are dyno tested following the guidelines of the Vehicle column in Table 1A.  Race engines are dyno tested following the Dynamometer column. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 5: Watching Tuning Pressure and Flow 
The main way to increase HP is to increase the engine’s volumetric efficiency or ability to breathe air and trap it in the cylinders.  One way to allow the engine to breathe more air is to pressurize the intake system like a supercharger does.  A pressurized intake system will push more air into the cylinder for every cylinder filling event.  Another way is  to reduce the pressure on the exhaust side, similar to what open headers do compared to a restrictive, full vehicle exhaust system.   
It turns out that you do not have to pressurize the intake system for the whole cycle to get the benefit of a pressurized intake.  If you only pressurize the intake, say to 5 PSI for only 30 degrees of rotation right before the intake valve closes you  get almost the same benefit as pressurizing to 5 PSI for the entire 720 degrees of the cycle.  The same is true on the exhaust side.  If you provide low exhaust backpressure only during overlap (when both the intake and exhaust valves are open or right before the exhaust valve closes) you get most of the benefit of running low backpressure. 
To increase pressure on the intake system and reduce pressure on the exhaust system, you must first reduce all flow restrictions to a minimum.  This includes restrictions like carburetor, muffler, restrictive intake and exhaust runners, and especially restrictive valves and ports.   
However, even with zero intake and exhaust restriction, volumetric efficiency for a non-supercharged engine could only get as high as 100%. Many race engines have volumetric efficiencies greater than 100%.  This is done by taking advantage of the pressure waves which are created in the intake and exhaust runners due to the normal cyclic nature of engine operation.  See Appendix 3.  The most competitive race engines are developed by maximizing the effect of these pressure waves by proper sizing of the intake and exhaust runners, cam timing and valve flow for the particular engine displacement and RPM operating range.  These engines are 

said to be highly tuned and are taking advantage of tuning waves in the intake and exhaust. 
A useful feature in the Pro is the ability to watch these tuning pressures while calculations are being performed.  See Section 3.7, See Engine.  Click on Show Tuning Pressures button to produce the screen shown in Figure A.14.  As said earlier, you only have to have high pressure on the intake side right before the intake valve closes to get a good increase in volumetric efficiency. The example in Figure A.14 shows a wave in the intake port of over 20 PSI absolute, which is over 5 PSI over atmospheric pressure of approximately 14.7 PSI. That is almost as good as running a supercharger with slightly over 5 PSI of boost! 
Figures A.15 - A.17 show several examples of Tuning Pressures and Flows screens identifying important points. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A.14 Screen of Tuning Pressures and Flows Showing Good Tuning 
Exhaust pressure steadily drops, coming close to exhaust port pressure.  After TDC, cylinder pressure follows intake port pressure. Ideally, cylinder and port pressures would match almost exactly, indicating very little flow restriction across the valves. 

Watch tuning pressures in this graph, where the objective is to maximize intake pressure and minimize exhaust pressure. 
Intake pressure close to intake valve closing is very high, over 20 PSI absolute, or over 5 psi higher than normal atmospheric pressure (around 15 PSIA) 
Exhaust pressure is low during overlap (between intake opening and exhaust closing) to pull a high portion of exhaust out of the cylinder. 
A slight amount of reverse flow  (velocity goes below 0) is present at intake closing. Too much reverse flow says piston is pushing fresh air & fuel which has entered the cylinder back into the intake port. 
Very little reverse flow is seen here for either the intake or 
exhaust during overlap. This indicates no reversion. 
Watch this Velocity graph to watch intake and exhaust flows and which direction the flow is going. Exhaust flow velocities will be higher because the exhaust is much hotter than the intake. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A.15 Runners Too Short for this RPM 
Cylinder pressure match exhaust and intake port pressures almost exactly.  This indicates very little flow restriction from the port and valve. This is a good thing, and would produce good power if the tuning pressures and/or valve timing were correct. 
Reflected vacuum pulse on the exhaust has returned too early, well before 
overlap. This could be fixed by using a longer exhaust header pipe. 
A high pressure exhaust pulse is present during overlap.  This causes reversion, or reverse flow. See the velocity graph. 

Intake pressure peak is occuring too early, well before intake closing. This is also shown by the reverse flow at intake closing in the velocity graph. The amplitude of this intake wave is also relatively low, indicating a smaller diameter intake runner may be required to produce a highe amplitude wave. 
Considerable reverse flow at intake closing because the high pressure intake pulse occured too early in the cycle, well before the intake valve closed. This could be corrected at this particular RPM with either a longer, and possibly smaller diameter intake runner or by closing the intake valve earlier. 
Reverse flow is indicated if velocity goes below 0. Here it goes below 0 for both the intake and exhaust, because there is a high pressure wave in the exhaust port during overlap. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A.16 Runners Too Long for this RPM 
Although there is an exhaust suction pulse during overlap, it is not as strong and wide as that shown in Figure A.14.  This exhaust header is not necessarily too small a diameter, but too long for this RPM. 
Although intake pressure at intake closing is quite high, the low pressure period caused by piston suction is quite long and deep. This intake port is too long for this RPM. 

There is no reverse flow at intake closing. Usually best volumetric efficiency is obtained when there is just a little reverse flow at intake closing. See Figure A.14. Exhaust velocity shows one continuous, large hump.  Usually best volumetric 


efficiency is obtained when there is one hump at blowdown (exhaust opening) and another hump in velocity at TDC (or overlap). See Figure A.14. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A.17 Runners Too Small for this RPM 
Exhaust pressure during overlap is too high, much higher than the blowdown pulse at intake opening. 
Very long and deep suction pulse from piston intake stroke. Pressure never recovers until after BDC. However, cyl­inder pressure matches intake port pressure quite closely, indicating very little flow restriction from the intake valve 
Intake velocity 
appears limited 
to a relatively 
high level, 
around 1000 
ft/sec.

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A.18 Valves and Ports Too Restrictive 
A restrictive exhaust valve is easy to spot because the the large difference in exhaust port pressure and cylinder pressure. 
A restrictive intake valve is less obvious, but is seen here by a relatively large difference in intake port pressure and cylinder pressure at mid stroke, where piston speed is the greatest. 

Again you see that there is no reverse flow at intake closing. 

Exhaust port pressure is higher at BDC (botton dead center) than at blowdown. This is showing that the piston has to push most of the exhaust out of the cylinder rather than having high exhaust pressure blow the exhaust into the exhaust port at blow down (exhaust valve opening). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A.19 Tuning Pressures when Supercharging 

When supercharged the intake pressure graph is shifted up by the amount of boost pressure. Notice that the tuning waves are still present, but intake pressure is always well above the Barometric Pressure line. 
Barometric Pressure in PSIA. 
If this engine were turbocharged, exhaust pressure would also have been raised by the amount of exhaust pressure driving the exhaust turbine. 
It is also possible to compare tuning pressures or flows from one condition to another using graphs.  For example, Figure A.20 shows a Single Data Graph of ExPort Pres (exhaust port pressure) for 2 diameters of exhaust header.  This is the same graph as exhaust port pressure in the upper graph in the Tuning Pressures and Flows screen, except without the barometric pressure line and intake and exhaust opening and closing lines.  Here you see the smaller diameter exhaust header produces much more exhaust pressure during overlap, which would hurt performance. 

hurting performance. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 6: Why So Many Inputs 
If you have used other engine simulation software, you will notice that the Engine Analyzer Pro uses many more inputs than other programs.  For example, you may wonder why we would ask for "anti-reversion", especially when we say that most heads (ports) have 0 anti-reversion. The Pro does not need to know the anti-reversion of the head to accurately predict the engine's performance potential.  It could simply make the assumption that there is 0 anti-reversion and be approximately correct for all current heads. 
Performance Trends does not know from where the next major breakthrough in engine technology will come.  But, by giving you freedom to simulate numerous unusual engine conditions (so many different inputs), you could possibly discover a breakthrough on the computer.  This is the only way to try radically new designs without actually building and dyno testing them.  
For example, 40 years ago, no one thought tire growth or clutch slippage was important in drag racing.  That was before the development of new technologies like "wrinkle wall" slicks, and "slider" clutches.  If computer simulations had been available in the 1950s which let you simulate tire growth and "slider" clutches, racers could have simulated these parts before they were invented.  Once they saw that the computer predicted better ETs, they would have developed the parts. 
In other words: 
Computer simulations should lead the technology breakthroughs by allow you to simulate running conditions which are not yet possible with existing parts. 
Simulations which only follow what is already being done can be useful to the novice racer who is content to follow what the innovators are doing. But they will not allow for new designs because there are not enough inputs which consider innovative designs. 
Theoretical vs Empirical Models: 
This brings up another point, the difference between a "theoretical" model and an "empirical" model.  An empirical model is based on past history, like the equations which predict HP per cylinder from intake valve air flow.  These are based on experience with flow testing lots of cylinder heads and then dyno testing the engines.   
A good analogy to an empirical model is a book with lots of dyno curves with descriptions of the engines.  You try to find an engine description in the book close to your engine and then see what power it produced.  Sometimes, mathematical "regression" techniques are used fill in the gaps between these dyno curves. 
Empirical models can be quite accurate if you are doing things similar to the developer of the model was doing (same fuel, same cam profile, same header design, etc.)  However, if you want to simulate something which the developer of the model has not tried, you are basically "on your own". 
The Pro is mostly theoretical, which means it is based on numerous laws (equations) of basic physics, like Force = Mass x Acceleration. These equations are then "tuned" to better fit known engine data.   
A good analogy to a theoretical model would be cardboard cutouts of a 4 link, rear suspension.  The cardboard strips represent the different links and pins locate the pivot points.  You can move the cardboard axle up and down and watch pinion angle change. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
A good test of a theoretical model is "does the model tell you things that the developer did not know".  For example, does it know that you get about a 4% performance improvement by increasing compression ratio 1 point without the developer telling it.  If the developer has told it, then it is probably an empirical model.  If it gives the correct result without being explicitly told, then it is probably a theoretical model. 
Theoretical models can accurately simulate real engines.  However, their big advantage is they can also simulate engines which the developer has never tested.  This could be a Jaguar V-12 when the developer has never seen a dyno curve for a V-12.  Or it could be an engine from the future.  For example, it could simulate heads with 100% anti-reversion (which allow no reversion of exhaust back into the intake runner), even though no one has ever built these heads. 
Clearly, future breakthroughs in engine building can only come from "cut and try" on the dyno or from "cut and try" with theoretical engine models.   
Note:   "Anti-reversion" was picked as only 1 example of some to the Pro's detailed inputs.  The Pro' has numerous of other inputs which allow the engine builder to try innovative designs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 7: Copying Files 
There are many times you may want to copy files to or from the Engine Analyzer Pro.  Examples would be: 
• 
Copying Cam Dr files from a floppy disk received from a cam grinder. 

• 
Copying engine or component files between Engine Analyzer Pro programs on different computers. 

• 
Copying ASCII files produced by the Engine Analyzer to the directory of a spread sheet program. 


Windows 3.1 
• 
Open File Manager (usually in the Main program group) 

• 
Click on Help from the Menu bar, then on Search, then type in the word COPY and click OK.  This will give an overview of copy commands. 


Here’s an example of copying a Cam Dr file from a floppy disk in the A drive to the CAMFILES directory (the directory where the Engine Analyzer Pro first looks for cam profile files) on the C drive. 
• 
Find the Disk Drive and directory you want to copy the file to and click on it.  In this example that would be the CAMFILES directory under the EAP directory under the PERFTRNS.PTI directory on the C drive. 

• 
If you clicked on CAMFILES, it should be highlighted on the left side of the File Manager window, and the files in that directory should be listed on the right side.  This is now the default directory. 

• 
Click on the A disk drive icon in the upper left corner.  Find the Cam Dr file you want to copy.  Click on it, hold the mouse key down, and drag it to the C disk drive icon.  This will copy the file to the default directory on the C drive. 


Windows 95 
• 
Click on Start, Programs, Windows Explorer. 

• 
Click on Help from the Menu bar, then on the Index tab, then type in the word COPY and click Yes.  This will give an overview of copy commands. 


Here’s an example of copying a Cam Dr file from a floppy disk in the A drive to the CAMFILES directory (the directory where the Engine Analyzer Pro first looks for cam profile files) on the C drive. 
• 
In Windows Explorer, find the Disk Drive and folder you want to copy the file to in the list on the left called All Folders and click on it.  In this example that would be the CAMFILES folder under the EAP folder under the PERFTRNS.PTI folder on the C drive. 

• 
Find the Disk Drive, Folder and Cam Dr File on the A drive in the All Folders list on the left.  You should see the Cam Dr file on the right side called Contents. 

• 
Click on the Cam Dr file, hold the mouse key down, and drag it to the list on the All Folders list on the left.  While holding the mouse button down, find the CAMFILES folder.  If it has moved off the screen at the top or bottom, move the mouse icon to the top or bottom.  The list of All Folders will scroll by until you see CAMFILES.  When you see CAMFILES, move the icon over it and release the mouse button. 


. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 8: Cam Calculations 
The Engine Analyzer Pro’s simple cam profiles (not using cam files) requires intake and exhaust cam duration or timing events at .050" lift from Base Circle at the tappet or follower.  It also uses Max Lift from Base Circle in Inches Measured At the Tappet or Follower.  See Section 2.6. 
Many cam grinders give exactly this information.  However, some give different specifications.  The guidelines below will help you convert other types of cam specs to the units required by the Engine Analyzer Pro. 
Notes: 
These specifications are also available from measurements of the valve train using a dial indicator and a degree wheel.  Performance Trends' Cam Analyzer helps with this process.  However, these procedures are beyond the scope of this manual, but are available from cam grinders, engine builders and "speed shops". 
The calculations below assume cam profiles are symmetric around the Max Lift or Lobe Centerline point. 
"Advertised" duration and events are assumed to indicate the points where the lash is eliminated and the valve just starts to open of close. Occasionally, a cam grinder will call the .050" duration or events the "advertised" duration or events. 
Estimate Duration at .050" Given Advertised Duration: Mechanical, flat tappet 
Duration @ .050" = Advertised Duration - 40 
Mechanical, roller 
Duration @ .050" = Advertised Duration - 32 
   Hydraulic, flat tappet 
Duration @ .050" = Advertised Duration - 56 
   Hydraulic, roller 
Duration @ .050" = Advertised Duration - 44 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Estimate Lobe Centerline from Duration and Overlap:
 Lobe Centerline = Advertised Duration - Advertised Overlap 2 
Lobe Centerline = Duration @ .050" lift - Overlap @ .050" lift 2 
Calculate Max Lift At Tappet Given Max Lift At Valve and Rocker Arm Ratio:
 Max Lift at Tappet = Max Lift at Valve Rocker Arm Ratio 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 9: New Features in Version 3.3 
Engine Analyzer Pro has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.1 for Windows. These include v2.1 B, v2.1C, v2.1D and now v3.3.  Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in these versions, including Version 3.3: 
• 
Program is now a 32 bit version, fully compatible with newer operating systems, starting with Windows, 95, then 98, Me, XP, and 2000. This also allows you to use much longer, more descriptive file names for saving engines, heads, etc. It is also more compatible with newer printers. 

• 
The program is now designed for 600 x 800 or higher resolution screens.  Screen colors are also more compatible with Windows XP. 

• 
On the main screen, you now have a “View Comments” button where you can view and modify comments for the Total Engine File and all Component Files. 

• 
There is now a separate "Examples" folder for example engine and component files provided by Performance Trends. New engine and component files which you save will be saved to a separate folder.  

• 
File commands to save an engine or component file to a floppy disk or CD, or open a vehicle file from a floppy disk or CD. This allows easy transfer of files from one computer to another. 

• 
You can now choose to list engine and component files alphabetically (as normally done) or by saved date, with the most recently saved files listed first. This should make it easier to find recent files more quickly. 

• 
When Opening Files, the program now lets you list only files with certain letters in their name, like 'Chev' or 'Ford'. This lets you find files faster.  

• 
Hundreds of new example parts have been added, including the entire Crane Cams Catalog, Brodix, AFR, Edelbrock, World Products, Dart and TFS heads, more Import parts, motorcycle parts and kart parts, and more. 

• 
Several new Example Complete Engine Files have been added. 

• 
Program now reads Engine Analyzer v 3.0, 3.2 and 3.2+ files and examples.  

• 
The user’s manual is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Display User’s Manual. The manual is in a high quality PDF format  

• 
The Performance Trends website is now available from inside the program by clicking on Help at the top of the main screen, then Performance Trends on the Web.  

• 
Engine Dimensions can now be entered as either inches or millimeters.  

• 
History Log keeps track of tests you have made, making it easier to recall engine specs or pick tests for making graphs.  

• 
The calculation accuracy has been “tweaked”.  Most evident changes are: 

• 
Spark Knock Index has been adjusted to be more realistic. 

• 
Revised the BSAC calculation to be more consistent with fuel flow (not change so significantly 'with weather conditions as done in earlier v3.0). 

• 
Very Rich gas as fuel option to help to reduce detonation. 

• 
Duration at .200" lift is now shown in the Cam/Valve Train screen for the combination of cam specs you have specified. 

• 
Short Block screen now shows Bore/Stroke and Rod/Stroke calculations. 

• 
Short Block screen now has Calc menu for finding the Bore or Stroke which will produce a certain desired engine displacement.  

• 
Several new restrictions have been added for the intake system, including Air Meter, Restrictor and Intercooler.    

• 
From better information than we previously had, the Coolant HP is now reduced and more accurate.  

• 
Cheater cam profiles (flat nose with limited lift and aggressive ramps) so you can get most any .200" duration by specifying a varying amount of 'Degree Dwell'. 

• 
The `Flow Coefficient' of the ports can now be calculated from up to 3 flow/lift points.  Using a full Flow Table is still the most accurate way of defining the flow of the port.  

• 
Alternate fuels like Propane, CNG (compressed natural gas, methane) and various types of diesel. 

• 
Program now allows for Chassis Dyno torque, where torque and HP are reduced by a certain percentage to simulate results from a chassis dyno.  This input is in the Calculate Performance Conditions screen and must be activated via a Preference in the Preferences menu. 

• 
Added Ring Land specs for the Compression Ratio Calculation screen. 

• 
Intercooler effectiveness can now be picked in 5% steps (previously it was 25% steps). 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
• 
Program now allows a wider array of Bearing Size Coefficients, more typical of 6 and 4 cylinder engines and other small engines. 

• 
The Calculation Menu for Bearing Size Coefficient now allows for estimates for roller bearings (typical of small, motorcycle or Kart engines). 

• 
A Preference allows you to have the program more closely match the results from the old v2.1D, rather than giving what we believe are the slightly more accurate results of v3.3.  This can be handy for users who have a great deal of experience with v2.1 D. 

• 
A Preference allows you to display either a Heat Release curve or Carb Metering Signal in the Cycle Data results.  The heat release curve is new to v3.3. 

• 
Two new Preferences allow for Valve Toss or Lifter PumpUp to either always show a power loss (typically a good setting if you are not studying Valve Train Dynamics), or to allow the engine to breath better if the valves are open significantly more.  This is the setting to use if you are trying to simulate “controlled valve toss” as done with some small Kart engine cams.  

• 
User defined Spark Curve now allows for 4 break points, increased from just 2 in v2.1. 

• 
A header Primary pipe can now have 2 steps and you can specify exactly the lengths of each step. 

• 
New Turbo “Turbine Eff, %” options for ball bearings, allowing boost to come on sooner. 

• 
Revised some turbo performance calculations after the wastegate comes on (show less performance). 

• 
Dyno Inertia in the Short Block specs is now more accurate when you do an accelerating dyno test. 

• 
Burn Rating replaces Swirl as an input in the Head Specs menu, and has several more choices for better fine tuning. 

• 
Several features have been added to the graphs, including: 

• 
The graph screen is now larger, and generally fills the entire screen. 

• 
The Graph cursor now interpolates between points.  This means that if one power curve has results at 2000, 2400 and 2800 RPM, and another has results at 2000, 2500 and 3000, the cursor will read both curves at all RPM points you ran, 2000, 2400, 2500, 2800 and 3000. 

• 
TDC and BDC labels are now displayed on the Cycle Data graphs.  If you are using a cursor, the cursor value is also given as, say “24 deg ABDC”. 

• 
A Preference lets you turn off the Graph always AutoScaling a new graph.  This means that if you have found a set of scales you like, the program will maintain them. 

• 
You can right click on the graph line labels to hide that particular Graph Line to reduce clutter on the screen.  Right clicking again will have the graph line reappear.  There is also a menu item under "View" on the Graph Screen so you can Hide or Restore hidden graph lines. 

• 
You can now save combinations of scale settings, like max and min RPM (X axis) and max and min torque and HP (Y axis) for easy retrieval in the future.  This makes comparisons of printed graphs much easier if they are always printed to the same scales.  This is done by clicking on the Set Scales button (right side of Graph Screen), and using the "Open Saved Settings", "Save Current Settings" or "Delete Saved Settings" menu options.  Note that you must turn AutoScaling Off for these features to work. 

• 
You can click on the graph line labels (left, normal button) and that line will flash so you can identify it easily. 

• 
New Printing options for graphs, including “Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment”, Width adjustments and more (in Preferences). 

• 
New Printing options for reports, including different Font Sizes and omitting the “Starting Point Suggestions” for cam and runner dimensions (in Preferences).  The “Starting Point Suggestions” often misled users into think they were more accurate than what their name implied, that they were just a suggested Starting Point from which you should start optimizing using the program. 

• 
Version 2.1 let you send a power curve to a vehicle program to be loaded and run in that vehicle.  Version 3.3 lets you do that also.  However, that process requires several key strokes and time.  Version 3.3 lets you “Auto-Link” with a vehicle program of your choosing.  Auto-Link runs every power curve you produce through a vehicle program, and produces a summary of the results.  Now you can instantly see how a cam change, head swap, more nitrous will affect ET or circle track Lap Times.  At the time of printing this manual, Auto-Link was only available for the Drag Racing Analyzer v3.2 and Circle Track Analyzer v3.2. 

• 
Added a Factor button to Flow Table screen so you can increase or reduce all flows by a certain percentage.  

• 
You can now enter either Tappet Lift or Valve Lift in the Cam Specs screen and the other input is automatically calculated based on the current Rocker Arm Ratio. 

• 
You can now pause the Tuning Pressures screen at the end of each RPM step, when the final results for that particular RPM have been reached. You can now Maximize the Tuning Pressures screen to fill your entire computer screen for better viewing.  Click on the maximize button in the upper right corner for this option. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
• 
Hemi and 4 valve cylinder heads are now drawn more correctly in the "See Engine" screen where you watch piston and valve movement and interaction. 

• 
Valve Angles and other specs concerning Piston-To-Valve clearance in the See-Engine screen are now saved in the Head Specs screen. You can view them by clicking on the Angles button.  Note that most example Head files and your old v2.1 files will not have these specs entered correctly or they will be blank. 

• 
The program is now using a more stable computer hardware #, so that minor changes to your computer settings will not require you to get a new unlocking number. 

• 
A new preference lets you customize the Test Results Summary.  You can choose either Peak Tq & HP @ RPM with Average Tq & HP (like old v2.1) or you can show a comparison of Peak and Avg Tq & HP (no RPM) for the current test and the previous test you selected to saved. 

• 
A new Preference allows you to change the relative size of the “Special Calculations” section of the output screen, Standard, Small, and Very Small. 

• 
On program shut down, the program now asks if you want your changes saved to the “Library Copy” of the file you are working with.  

• 
The Engine Analyzer Pro can now read several cam file formats, including Cam Dr ™, Cam Pro Plus ™, S96, Doctor Dr, Competition Cams ™, and Andrews ™.   



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A21 Some New Features on Main Screen 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 






This section shows Head files saved specifically for Engine Analyzer Pro, with all Engine Analyzer Pro specs entered.  
Certain Preferences may have to be turned on or adjusted for these features to be shown or work correctly.  







(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
History Log 
The original Engine Analyzer Pro v2.1 had a method of letting you save important test results for analysis and comparisons in the future in a “Common List”, a list of commonly used test results files.  This was done by clicking on File” at the top of the test results screen.  Read Section 3.6, page 147 for more information on using this powerful, but somewhat less convenient method of saving test results.   
The Engine Analyzer Pro remembers the results and the engine specs which produced those results for up to the last 25 to 100 runs you have made.  The number of runs saved is selectable in the Preferences menu.  This can be a very handy comparison of one run to another and saves you the trouble of making notes on pieces of paper.  It is also handy to be able to go back to some condition which gave very good performance, but you don’t remember why or what the specs were.  Figure A33 shows the History Log and options.   
This History Log is also the method used to determine which test results will be graphed.  You have 3 choices for picking results to graph: 
1. 
Current Run only 

2. 
Current Run plus the “Last” run (where the Last run is the run made immediately before the Current Run) 

3. 
Current Run plus runs picked from the History Log (or “Common List” if you have chosen to “Use Old v2.1’s ‘Common List’ as Method of Picking Which Saved Runs to Graph”, Section 3.6, page 147) 


Figure A33 History Log and Options 

Click on Test Title to retrieve the specs which produced these results. 
History Log is displayed below the columns of test results. 
Click and move slide bar to display all 25 to 100 runs in the History Log. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
This section discusses the use of the new History Log, and how it can be used to do analysis, retrieve past results and engine specs, and choose saved test results for graphing. 
Test Title 
Click on Test Title and you are asked if you want to retrieve the specs which produced these results.  The program will first ask if you want these specs retrieve, answer Yes and the specs are retrieved. 
Graph? 
You can choose what Test Results to graph by clicking on the Graph column to insert a Yes there.  Clicking on a Yes will blank it out (remove the Yes).  Tests marked Yes to Graph will be graphed when you click on the 'Graph Tests Marked 'Yes' '.  The first test (usually the current Test you are working with) is always graphed even with no Yes marked.  The number of tests actually graphed are limited by available space, usually a limit of about 24 graph lines total.  The tests marked in the History Log are only graphed if you have clicked on “history log (list)” at the top of the Graph Screen. 
Graph Title 
Graph Title is the name which will be printed on graphs for this run.  The default Graph Title is the engine file’s name.  Click on Graph Title and you can change the name to most anything you want, 16 characters maximum. This is a useful place to put what this test is, like “Crane 256 Cam”, or “Baseline”. 
Save 
Choose to Save certain Test Results by clicking on the Save column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Save move to the bottom of the History Log as more runs are made, but will not fall off the History Log. 
Pk Tq/Incr, Avg Tq/Incr, Pk HP/Incr, Avg HP/Incr 
Are the Peak Torque, Average Torque, Peak HP and Average HP test results for the particular run.  The “Incr” results are the increase of a particular run over the previous run.   
Print 
You can print the History Log on a printer by clicking on the 'Print' menu command.   Note that the History Log will be most readable when the Page Orientation is in Landscape setting. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
History Log at Graph Screen 
At the Graph Screen, several options are available to graph selected tests from the History Log, and change the Graph Titles.  You can obtain the History Log by clicking on the menu command History Log at the top of the Graph Screen.  The History Log is how you graph different tests together for comparison.  From this screen you can: 
• 
Choose to Graph certain Test Results by clicking on the Graph column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Graph will be graphed when you click on the 'Graph Tests Marked 'Yes' '.  The first test (usually the current Test you are working with) is always graphed even with no Yes marked.  The number of tests actually graphed are limited by available space, usually a limit of about 24 graph lines total.  

• 
Graph only the current test results (the test file at the top of the Log) by clicking on 'Graph Current Test Only'. 

• 
Click on 'Graph Title' to change the Standard Title for this test.  The program defaults to the Engine File Name, but you can change this to most any name of 24 characters or less.  You can also specify 'Alternate' titles and legend names by clicking on 'Format' at the top of the Graph Screen, then 'Edit Titles/Legends'. 


Important:  The History Log is only used as described here for picking which test results to graph in you have set “Use Old v2.1’s ‘Common List’ as Method of Picking Which Saved Runs to Graph” to No in the Preferences menu. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Appendix 10: New Features in v 3.5 
Engine Analyzer Pro has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.1 for Windows. These include v2.1 B, v2.1C, v2.1D v3.3 and now v3.5.  Here is a brief listing of some of the features new since v3.3 was released, including Version 3.5: 
New Features: 
• 
The “Chain Calculation” feature to automatically set up several calculations with various settings has been extensively expanded. Previous to v3.5, you could only set 1 or 2 engine specs to change between calculations.  Now you can set up to 6 different engine specs to change, allowing you to make thousands of calculations without requiring any action from you.  Since thousands of calculations require lots of time (hours or days), an estimate of the required time is displayed before you start the calculations. Also, because thousands of calculations would require lots of evaluation time, settings are available to only keep combinations and results which meet your requirements.  See Fig . There is also a new Preference you can set to keep the best 5 to 35 results, under the General Operation tab called “Chain Results to Display”.  However, all results are kept, and if you change the requirements, the to 5 to 35 results for the new criteria will be displayed. 

• 
The Engine Analyzer Pro will now Auto-Link to the Fuel Economy Calculator, and let you send power curves to both Fuel Economy and Trans Gear Plus Calculator programs. 

• 
In the See Engine screen (to watch the piston interact with the valves, flows and pressures) an Viewing Speed option has been added.  Also, the graph at the top of the "See Engine" screen now will adjust its scales if the results go off scale, unless you've asked for "detailed" graphs, where then the scales are adjusted to zoom in on certain results. 

• 
A new Graph command to show the line labels (Legend Titles) in larger text has been added. Click on Format, then Legends (graph line labels), then you have 3 choices.  Classic is old way, Larger and Largest show the text in larger fonts for easier reading, and let you scroll up and down to show all of them. 

• 
Several options and features for emailing files has been added.  At the main screen, you can click on File, and then Email an Engine File.  Also, once you have calculated results, you can click on Print, then Print Test Results, and check the “Email as PDF ™ file”.  This allows you to email an Adobe Acrobat printout of the report to any email address.  You must have Adobe Distiller as a printer option to do this, only available if you own the full Adobe Acrobat. 

• 
The Preferences menu now has a new Tab called Emailing, where settings for these new email options are stored.  If you are using Outlook, Outlook Express or Eudora, all you need to do is choose one of them.  If you choose “Other-use specs below”, you will have to fill in the required fields: 

• 
IP address can be obtained by clicking on the Find button. 

• 
SMTP server must be obtained from the settings in your email program. 

• 
Sender Email Address lets you specify the email address that the recipient of the email can reply back to. 

• 
Note:  In Eudora, to eliminate a MAPI warning, click on tools, options, MAPI, shut off the automatic warning of MAPI. 

• 
In Preferences, under the General Operation tab, options for having the computer “beep” when calculations are done have been added 

• 
You can right click in the list of Std Engine Analyzer Example Cams and the Valve Lift (tappet lift x rocker arm ratio) is displayed. 

• 
The program now makes metric to English and vice versa conversions of the head angle and clearance dimensions, part of the Head Specs. 

• 
Click on File at the top of the main screen, and either Backup or Restore to backup or restore some or all data files with only a couple of key strokes.  This makes it much easier to backup and restore files, and transfer the program from one computer to another. 

• 
In the Head, Intake and Exhaust screens, there is a button to “Show Layout”, a drawing of the intake and exhaust runners and valves. Version 3.5 now more accurately resizes these drawings if you resize this screen, and shows the labels in Inches or MM. 

• 
The program now shows pictures of typical Manifold Types in Intake Specs screen to better clarify what is meant by the various types. 

• 
A Calculation Menu (Clc button) option for Intercooler Restriction based on intercooler dimensions has been added.  Also, if you calculate Intercooler Restriction from dimensions, an optimistic estimate of Intercooler Effectiveness is also calculated, which you can use if you choose to. 

• 
A new Preference to have program remember the last type of graph you were making when you restart the program has been added. It is under the Printing/Graphing tab and is called 'Always Remember Last Graph Setup'. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
• 
The program now remembers any 'search phrase' you were using in the various “Open” screens for the engine and component libraries.  It also now has a 'Show All Files' button to simply restore all files to the list. 

• 
The program now warns if the intake or exhaust lobe max lift is zero, typically caused from a problem in a cam profile file. 

• 
The program now asks to save changes to the engine file you are working on (to the permanent copy in the Engine Library) when quitting the program. 

• 
The program no longer checks for valid cam specs that are not needed, like if you are using a Cam File.   

• 
Program now has some enhancements in the Preview when opening Metric files. 

• 
Now if you click on Cancel at point where program asks for a Report Comment, you will cancel printing also, in addition to canceling just entering a comment. 

• 
An 'Open from Cam Analyzer' button in the Retrieve form for Cam/Valve Train screen has been added.  It explains how to go about using a Cam Dr file. 

• 
A Preference to 'Choose Data NOT to Display' in the Test Results screen has been added. 

• 
A Preference to allow NOT printing the Special Calculations section has been added. 

• 
A more detailed help for Valve Angles, Comp Ratio calculation menus and History Log has been added. 


New Inputs: 
• 
Added new Cam Profile Option of Specified Ramp which would then enable Ramp Rating, a rating from 0-100% with 100% being the most aggressive ramp.  There is also now a new 'Clc' button for Ramp Rating to determine which rating best matches your profile specs. 

• 
Added 4 more input lifts for the flow table, so it now has 12 total.  Added a check for unusual flow coefficients (less than .3 or greater than .9) when leaving the Flow Table, and program asks if you want to keep current entries. 

• 
A new Turbo Input of “Maximum Flow, CFM”, has been added.  It is estimated on a compressor map as the point on the right side of the map where the efficiency has dropped to 40% at a pressure ratio (PR) of 2.  The program assumes that flows much higher than this will produce very poor efficiency and the turbo has met its flow limit. 

• 
A new Turbo Input of "Wastegate Is..." has been added, so boost can be controlled to either the pressure Before or After the Intercooler. 

• 
Increased the Turbo A/R ratio allowed in the Calculation Menu. 

• 
Added both Single and Dual Ball Bearing Types to the Turbo Exhaust Turbine Efficiency choices. 

• 
Many more choices for Turbo Exhaust Turbine Efficiency have been added, 55, 65, 70, 80 and 90%.  It was previously 55, 70 and 80% 

• 
The "Throttle Location" in the Roots Supercharger specs was changed to 'Type", a combination of Throttle Location and Basic design.  The Design choices are Standard (like in prior versions of EA Pro) and a new "Modern" design, new for v3.5. The Modern Choice assumes that tight seals do not increase the friction as much as prior versions and that the volumetric efficiency is slightly better also. 

• 
A 'Use MM Inputs' in the Calc Menu for Carb/Throttle Body CFM Rating when using Inches for measurement inputs has been added. Most throttle bodies, even in the US are measured in mm. 

• 
An additional method of calculating Rocker Arm Stiffness for Valve Train Dynamics has been.  It is based on the amount of 'Lost Lift' of the valve because of the valve spring force at max valve lift. 

• 
The program now allows collector exits to be as small as 60% of the Exh Runner Diameter. 

• 
The program now allows for negative taper angles on the Detailed Exh Collector. 

• 
The program now allows for slowing down the burn rate by up to 50%.  Previously, the program only allowed for speeding up the burn rate. 

• 
The minimum Eff Rocker Arm Stiffness has been dropped down to 1000.  Some small engines do have numbers this low.   

• 
The minimum dimension required for some critical specs has been lowered so VERY small engines can be simulated. 

• 
The Air Meter and Intake Racing Venturi Restrictor inputs, and their calculation menus, have been finalized and updated. 

• 
An Air Cleaner restriction CFM can now be calculated from Flow Data. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
New Outputs: 
• 
As discussed above, the Chain Calculation allows for many new types of output, including average and peak torque and HP.   

• 
A 'Spring Table' option to the Valve Train Dynamics screen has been added.  It allows you to print out tables of spring force at various lifts, with option for forces as seated height and valve open height also. 

• 
Several features to deal with Valve “Clash” for Hemi and 4 Valve heads in the See-Engine screen (which also evaluates piston-to-valve clearance) have been added.  Clash occurs when a valve enters into the valve 'curtain area' of the other valve, for example if the intake enters into the 'curtain area' of the exhaust valve during overlap. 

• 
A new Preference for Desired 'Clash' clearance has been added.  If Clash is less than this amount, the Clash value is displayed in Red in the See-Engine screen. 

• 
An option has been added to the See-Engine screen, to print tabular data for piston clearance, piston position, pressures, valve opening, and new 'Clash' in either 1 or 4 degree increments.  This option can be accessed by either clicking on the Options at the top of the See Engine screen, then clicking on the Tabular Data buttons, or clicking on  Print, then one of the Print Options. 

• 
A Preference to graph either Carb Metering Signal or Heat Release has been added. 

• 
The turbo output for Pressure Ratio to better describe the ratio across the compressor by itself has been refined.  Previously, the PR more closely equaled the PR across the compressor and intercooler together. 


Accuracy Improvements: 
The new inputs discussed above have allowed for improved accuracy.  In addition to these changes, the calculations themselves have been refined for better accuracy.  These include the following: 
• 
Several refinements to the exhaust tuning for better accuracy have been made. This includes how the flows and pressure waves change at the junctions and steps, and how the runner and collector is divided up into sections for calculations.  . In general, these more accurate exhaust tuning features tend to show slightly more performance than found in v3.3.  Highly tuned engines show more improvement in v3.5 than stock engines, which show almost no difference.  These improvements make the “Detailed Collector” option more accurate than in previous versions. 

• 
There is a Preference to have the program estimate either valve toss or hydraulic lifter pump up even with Valve Train Dynamics turned Off.  In v3.3, the program could be showing a power loss, but not be showing valve toss or hydraulic lifter pump up.  In v3.5, if there is a power loss from valve toss or hydraulic lifter pump up, the program also shows that valve toss or hydraulic lifter pump up are present. 

• 
The program now increases the stiffness at the cam/lifter stiffness for rocker arm OHC and direct acting OHC valve trains. 

• 
The program has several refinements for estimating valve train friction, valve toss or hydraulic lifter pump up, and exhaust tuning when using mm measurements.    

• 
The seat timing events in the Special Calculations section when using .000" as the event are more accurate because program previously used .0005" as the cut off point, not .000".   

• 
The Turbo Nozzle Area is now being estimated more accurately when specifying twin turbos. 

• 
The program now estimates the effect of intake boost pressure and/or exhaust back pressure on valve opening forces and dynamics more accurately.  The program now also shows warnings in the results and the Valve Train Dynamics input screen if these pressure forces are significant compared to valve seated force. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices Figure A35 New Chain Calculation Features 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 




Figure A36 New See-Engine Features 

Valve Separation, used in Valve Clash calculations  
Valve Clash results, for multi valve and Hemi type heads. Valve Clash is what the clash clearance is at this particular crank degree being shown. Min Valve Clash is the smallest clearance for all crank degrees tested. If it is negative (-), it means that particular valve has entered into the other valve’s ‘curtain’ surface, a cylinder swept out by the edge of the valve. See drawing at bottom of this figure.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009  Engine Analyzer Pro  Appendices  
Figure A37 New Options to Format the Graph Legend (labels)  
Click on Format, then Legend, then Pick the View you want.  Classic View can be quite small and difficult to read if you have lots of graph lines.  

Click on the ‘More’ button to move the Legends down. A ‘More’ button will show up at the bottom of the legend when you need to move the 
Larger View shows legend in larger text font. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A38 New Ramp Rating for Describing Cam Profiles in More Detail 



Fig A39 New Calculation Menus 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 



Figure A42 File Backup and Restore Options 


IMPORTANT: Be very careful when restoring files. You can overwrite more recent files with changes you want to keep with older files, if they have the same name. You may want to make a backup of all your files as they currently exist before restoring files. That way if you loose some files, you can restore them. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 


Appendix 11: New Features in v 3.9 
Engine Analyzer Pro has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.1 for Windows. These include v2.1 B, v2.1C, v2.1D, v3.3, v3.5 and now v3.9.  Here is a brief listing of some of the features new since v3.5 was released, including Version 3.9: 
New Features: 
The screen for opening standard Engine Analyzer Example Cams now shows the Gross Valve Lift and Lobe Separation for the cam you selected if you right click on the selected cam.  Fig A44. 
The screen for opening standard Engine Analyzer Example components now lets you select to only show components which match up to 3 criteria you have selected at the bottom of the screen.  For example, you can choose to only show “Crower” cams with a lobe lift greater than .330 inches.  Fig A44. 
The screen to pick a Category of standard Engine Analyzer examples is now more intuitively obvious as to how it works, and it also remembers your last choices which will save time when you use this feature often.  Fig A43. 
We’ve now added 'Chain Calc These Cams' button when displaying standard Engine Analyzer example cams.  This will have the program calculate performance for all cams in the list which meet the criteria of ‘Show Examples Only Fitting These Limits'.    Fig A44. 
You can include a graphics file, which could be your company logo, when printing graphs and reports.  This file is loaded in via the Preferences screen. Fig A45 and Fig A49. 
You can include add dyno power curves which you have entered manually to a graph.  This lets you make comparisons between actual dyno performance and the Engine Analyzer Pro’s simulated results.  Soon we will be exporting power runs from our Dyno DataMite software to the Engine Analyzer Pro.  The default location for these files is the “engine” folder in the Engine Analyzer Pro v3.9 folder.  Fig A48. 
You can now import Cam Analyzer files almost seamlessly.  The Pro will now install the cam nearly exactly as measured, even if the lobe is asymmetric.  Fig A56. 
You can now email results as a simple text file now in Print Options, which does not require a PDF writer program like Adobe Acrobat. 
Program now remembers the ASCII file name and path, and which data channels have been selected to be output in an ASCII file. 
Program now better accommodates the first column in printouts if the title in the left column is very long, like for a chain calculation.  Fig A44. 
A new Preference has been added under "General Operation, cont" tab to let you hide the Progress Bar during calculations.  This lets you minimize the program during calculations to work with other programs, which can be very handy when doing long chain calculations.  Fig A45.   
We’ve now added Delete Row and Insert Row buttons to the Flow Table screens in Head Specs.  Fig A47. 
You can now select to include the torque and HP data when you print out RPM data graphs as long as there are torque and/or HP data on the graph.  Click on the Tq / HP Data option.  Fig A49.   
The program now has a separate ASCII File command in the Output Screen to make it more obvious you can export the data as ASCII data. 
Now program can now better find newer versions of Acrobat or Acrobat Reader to display the user’s manual, supplements, and more.  You can also ‘browse’ to find Adobe Acrobat in the Preferences screen.  Also, the program now allows other “PDF Writing” programs produce PDF files for emailing, other than just Adobe programs. 
Program now better remembers the printer you have selected and landscape vs portrait when you click on Windows Printer Setup in various screens.   
Some printouts now use a proportional font for better printouts. 
Program now remembers its screen position and window size and restores it when it is opened again.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Now program should require you to 'Allow' it to run in Vista (same as right click on desktop icon, then select Run As Administrator').  This should make the program more Vista compatible. 
New Inputs: 
The program now lets you enter various types of ethanol fuels, like E85, and other percents of ethanol and gasoline.  It now also has a Richness factor input which makes it easier to pick different types of fuels and richness factors.  Fig A50. 
You can now specify a variable cam timing, or Variable Valve Timing (VVT).  This lets you specify a particular RPM where the program switches from the base cam timing to a modified cam timing and lift.  This can be for the intake and/or cam profiles.  Fig A53. 
You can now specify an amount of Asymmetry to a cam profile being created in the program.  Fig A52. 
You can now specify up to 6 break points in spark curve.  It was previously limited to just 4. 
We’ve added a “Clc” button for Lobe Lift being calculated from Gross Valve Lift and Rocker Arm Ratio in the Cam Specs. 
We’ve added several general intake manifold types.  These choices let you pick a manifold type and the program will estimate various measurements based on the engine size and intake port size in the Head Specs screen.  You can see what the program has estimated for these specs.  Then if you change the type to “Use Specs Below”, you can modify these to your liking.  Fig A51. 
The Centrifugal Superchargers now have a Max Airflow input.  This allows the program to better fine tune the supercharger performance map within its calculations.  
We’ve added hundreds of new standard Engine Analyzer Example cams, including Comp Cams, Crower, Isky, Lunati, Harley Davidson, and production cams.  Hundreds of these are for stock engines courtesy of John Holm.  Many thanks John.  Many of the Harley Davidson cams are courtesy of Stephen Mullen of S&P Mullen Enterprises, Inc www.Nightrider.com or www.tuneyourharley.com . Many thanks Stephen. 
We’ve added several new standard Engine Analyzer Example cam categories, especially Imports.  Fig A43. 
You can now specify .053" lift for rating cam events (like Harley Davidson cams).   
We’ve added an option to import Other Format Files for Head files, like .flw and .dfw files from Desktop Dyno (tm) and DynoSim (tm).  Hundreds of compatible head files with flow data, valve sizes, and some with port volume (not available with typical Desktop Dyno or D ynoSim files) are available via Stan Weiss at http://users.erols.com/srweiss/tablehdc.htm You can purchase a CD from Stan with all the files or just visit his site for free info for your particular heads.  I believe if you purchase the CD, everything will be in the correct format and you may have additional data not free on the website, like port volume.  Note:  Not all head files have port volume, material, etc.  Fig A54. 
We’ve added an option to import Other Format Files for Cam files, like .cam and .scm files from Desktop Dyno (tm) and DynoSim (tm).  Fig A55.   
Program now has section for storing comments about the valve train dynamics specs. 
We’ve added several new Chevy LSx and LTx example files of both Components and Total Engines courtesy of Aaron Anderson. Many thanks Aaron. 
We’ve added many example Garrett turbocharger files, courtesy of Bjn Deildok of SWR Performance, Norway.  Many thanks Bjorn. 
We’ve added the ability to calculate turbo turbine Nozzle Diameter based on exhaust turbine flow data. 
The program now asks if you want to use an unrecognized cam file format.  This can help if you have a file which is not exactly the correct format but still useable. 
New Outputs: 
We’ve added Sq In Area and Port Volume to the Head Specs screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
We’ve added a new Preference under "Calculations, cont" tab to let you pick the number of decimal places to use to display torque and HP. This does NOT improve the accuracy of the calculations.  Fig A46. 
We’ve added 2 new Preferences to allow all or user selected outputs to be displayed in Metric units.  Fig A46. 
We’ve modified the Preference setting of  'Include Averages in Chain Results' to 'Chain Results Include' either No Averages, Average Tq and HP, and now Avgs + Engine Masters Challenge.  The Chain Calculations now include the engine Displacement in CID with Idle Vacuum to provide the info necessary for this calculation.  The calculation is: 
   Engine Masters Challenge Score = (Avg Tq + Avg HP) x 1000 / cid 
The Average torque and HP is calculated over the RPM range you have selected to calculate.  The Engine Masters Challenge rules can change from year to year, and will determine the RPM range.  You can also rank your chain results based on this EMC Score. See Fig A44 for results and Fig A45 for the Preference Setting. 
Accuracy Improvements: 
We’ve improved the accuracy of Roots Supercharger simulation at very low RPMs which would typically produce very low 
boost levels.   We’ve made some improvements to the calculation about the amount of boost or exhaust pressure required to blow the valves off their seat. 
We’ve made some improvements to the tables of Spring Force vs Spring Height, available in the Valve Train Dynamics screen. 
We’ve added a Preference for Filter (smooth) Cam Lobe File data.  Since Cam File data can come from many different sources, it may be best to set this to Yes, especially if you are doing Valve Train Dynamics.  Fig A45.  If you are using a Cam Lobe File for either the intake or exhaust lobe, then the velocity and acceleration data for this lobe will 
be filtered also. 
We’ve increased the "Number of Cam Bearings" allowed up to 40 (was 20) for calculating Bearing Size Coef. in Short Block Specs. We’ve fixed a bug where direct acting OHC buckets would show valve toss at very low RPM (less than 1000) due to math 
problem.   We’ve refined the blow-by calculations, so that the amount of leakage also reflects a loss of fuel energy due to lost fuel.   The program now allows for up to 20 degrees cam advance or retard. We’ve made refinements to the Estimated Idle Vacuum in the Special Calculations section.  Now it is based on the Barometer 
setting in the Calculation Conditions screen, supercharger type, and some other refinements. We’ve added a Preference to have Cranking Compression calculated by cranking RPM, barometric pressure, and cylinder leakage, or just the simpler v3.5 and earlier versions.  For a little background, if there is any leakage as specified in the Short Block Specs screen, that bleeds off cranking compression.  The faster you spin the engine to recording cranking compression, 
the less time available to leak and the higher the pressure.  Also, the higher the barometric pressure, obviously the higher the cranking compression.  Fig A46. Lifts at TDC are now done with NO lash, to better match what most cam grinders report. We’re now doing a more precise simulation of the difference between aluminum vs cast iron heads for Knock Index difference.  We’ve increased the Piston Speed limit above which program says is Impossibly High because materials and technology have 
made huge improvements over the years.   We’ve made some refinements to the Cam Profiles created by the EA Pro to more precisely time them to the nearest 0.1 deg. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 




Figure A45 New Preference Settings 
Choose what to include in Chain Calculation Results 
Choose Yes and you can click on the Browse button to find a graphics file on your computer and this will be included in your printouts. See Figure A49. 
Setting this to Yes lets you minimize the program when it performs long Chain Calculations so you can work with other applications. 
Set to Yes and program will Filter (smooth out) the Cam Lift data file it reads to describe the cam lobe, like a Cam Dr ™ file, Cam Pro Plus ™ file, etc. specified in the Cam/Valve Train screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

Figure A47 Flow Data Table Screen (from Head Specs Screen), New Commands 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

Figure A51 Picking a “Typical” Manifold Type in the Intake Specs Screen. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A52 Asymmetric Cam Profiles 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 









Appendix 12: New Features in v 3.9 B 
Engine Analyzer Pro v3.9 B has many updates, new example engine files and component files, and improved features.  Here is a listing of the features new since v3.9 A was released. 
New Features: 
You can now link your engine file to a picture file.  This picture appears on main screen and adjusts to fit the available screen.  This picture file can also be included in printouts of graphs and reports.  Fig A57-A58. 
You can now do Chain Calculations on Opening and Closing Cam Events. 
Program now has a Graph on the Cam Specs screen to give you an idea of the shape of the valve lift curves, this graph is updated with each change you make to the inputs.  You can also click the graph lines in the Cam/Valve Train specs screen and the data at that point are displayed at the bottom of the graph.  Fig A59. 
The program has several new features for outputting reports as ASCII text files.  Fig A60.  These files are useful for using results in other programs like Microsoft Excel ™.  These features include: 
• 
Option for exporting as simple text (.txt) or files more compatible with Excel, like comma separated (.csv). 

• 
There is a new Browse button for creating names locating where the files are written. 

• 
There’s a new option for outputting the data as either Rows or Columns. 

• 
There’s a new field where you can enter several comments which will appear at the bottom of the ASCII file.  When opening a Total Engine File, there is a new "Compare" button.  If you click on a file name (but not open it), you can click 


this button and see what modifications have been done to a particular file compared to the file you are currently working with. Fig A61. Printed graphs have a new layout which eliminates the left side border which could appear “broken” on some printers. When sending files to vehicle programs, there is a new Browse button for looking for files and programs. The program now sends files you delete to the Recycle Bin instead of permanently deleting them.  This allows you to recover 
them from the Recycle bin if you made a mistake. 
The program now works better if you are pressing the < > and >< buttons on graph to change scales or after changing scales you go to print the graph.  There is a new option on the Graph screen under File called “Email Graph Printout as PDF” file.   The program now has many enhancements for Email Preferences for more modern email servers.  Fig A62-A63. The program has a new “Convert” option to be able to modify the CFM entries on the screen for entering detailed turbo map 
data.  This allows the user to enter data in various units, and then convert the flow data to CFM or increase or reduce the data by 
a particular factor.  Enterprise Edition only. The input grid on the screen for detailed turbo or centrifugal map screen will now enlarge better if the screen is enlarged.  This makes it much easier to read the grid.  Also, now clicking on the Turbo or Cent SC Map will highlight the cell at the point you clicked on the map.  Enterprise Edition only. 
You can now load a .jpg image of a compressor map for more efficient and accurate “translating” its data into an Engine Analyzer Pro compressor map file.  Enterprise Edition only. 
New Inputs: 
The Enterprise Edition has a completely new input screen called Valve Spring Dynamics.  Here you can describe 1, 2 or 3 valve springs for Intake and Exhaust and the program will evaluate how they will work with a particular valve train.  New graph options let you watch how well controlled the coils behave, and if you are likely to have valve spring surge. With valve spring dynamics On, the program will also simulate valve bounce on the seat and how that valve bounce re-opens a valve and could 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
affect power.  Note:  For this first version, the units in this screen are always in English units.  Files you create in Engine Analyzer Pro are saved in the Users Spring Files folder. 
The program now has 2 more types of Roots Supercharger Types to pick from, “Modern” and “Modern 2000+”.  The original Roots Supercharger type (now called “Standard”) is for an old style GMC blower, like a “671”.  The new types represent superchargers installed on production supercharged cars like modern Mustangs and Corvettes.  Fig A64. 
The program now allows for a “ramp” (gradual) change in valve duration, timing and lift when simulating VVT (variable valve timing).  Fig A68. 
The program will now read a “.p” file format of cam file. 
Valve Spring “Compression to Bind” is a new input in the Valve Train Dynamics screen and the Valve Spring Dynamics screen. The program also considers this bind travel when doing valve train dynamics calculations for improved valve train simulation accuracy.  There is also a new “Clc” calculation utility screen for calculating this travel.  Fig A65. 
There are now more Std Engine Analyzer example cams supplied with 'the Pro were available, mostly Comp Cams BB and SB Chevy.   
In Head Specs, there is a new choice for Chamber Designs which are for modern Direct Injection.  Fig A66. 
Program now lets you select which ports to use for importing tests from the Port Flow Analyzer program.  Fig A67.  
We’ve added several new Example Total Engine Files, component files like Complete Heads, and full compressor maps for both turbos and centrifugal superchargers. 
You can now use KG for force for calculating spring force and rate for valve train dynamics in 'Clc' screen. 
There’s a new Preference called "Valve Lift at TDC Assumes 0 Lash" under the Calculations tab.  The Valve Lift @ TDC is shown in the Special Calculations section of the results.  If you choose Yes for this, the program assumes there is NO LASH when checking this lift, like if checking with a light duty test spring.  If you choose No, the program assumes there is the lash the program used for performance calculations.  For Hydraulic lifters, this is typically assumed to be .006" lash, or compliance. 
New Outputs: 
When doing Valve Spring Dynamics, the program has new Graph Options for graphing the valve spring motion, and an 
“animation” screen to visualize the valve spring motion.  Enterprise Edition only. If you choose a Cam File for the cam profile in the Cam/Valve Train specs screen, the program now checks the Max Valve Lift for the cam file, and displays it on the screen. 
There is a new Preference to allow you to pick of number of decimal places for RPM data to be reported. 
Printouts now show proper units for Engine Input Specs in either Inches or MM, depending on your choice of units in Preferences. Bind Clearance now displayed in the Special Calculations section of the Report Screen after calculating performance.  Bind 
Clearances is calculated from peak valve lift from the cam specs and the new input Valve Spring “Compression to Bind”. The Special Calculations section at the bottom of results now are shown in mm instead of inches where appropriate.   
Accuracy: 
The program considers the new input of Valve Spring “Compression to Bind” when doing valve train dynamics calculations for 
improved valve train simulation accuracy. The new Roots Supercharger types will greatly improve accuracy of simulating modern positive displacement (roots type) superchargers. See New Inputs section. 
The program has refined its simulation of plenum volume for race EFI and tunnel ram intake manifolds.   There has been some refining of the Knock Index calculation.  This does not affect performance calculations.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A57 Picture File Features 
Picture File 
shown here Click here for Picture File options 
If screen is enlarged, the picture file will fill the available screen area. 
File options in Graph screen. 
Options for including picture file in graph printouts. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009  Engine Analyzer Pro  Appendices  
Figure A58 Picture File Features, cont  
Printing picture nomal  

Printing picture smaller 
Printing picture file in reports 
Printing picture file smaller in Reports 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 









Appendix 13: New Features in v 3.9 (A & 
B) Enterprise Edition 
The Enterprise Edition of Engine Analyzer Pro has some very advanced features the typical user would not use.  These include: 
• 
You can use a full compressor map to define the performance of a turbocharger compressor.  Figs A70 and A71. 

• 
You can specify a particular turbocharger boost level, intake manifold temperature (after the turbocharger compressor), and exhaust backpressure level.  This gives you more freedom to simulate some particular situation which may be difficult to simulate using the turbocharger compressor and turbine model specs in the program.  Fig A72. 

• 
You can view the compressor map when calculations are being performed to see what area of the map is being used.  Fig A73. 

• 
You can use a full compressor map to define the performance of a centrifugal supercharger compressor.  Figs A74 and A75. 

• 
You can design a system where a centrifugal supercharger feeds into a roots blower supercharger.  Fig A76. 

• 
You can interface to the Compression Ratio Calculator program and transfer data back and forth between them.  Figs A77 through A80. 

• 
You can run a part throttle performance “map”.  This map can be useful for calibrating electronic engine controllers, or just understanding part throttle performance.  Fig A81 and A82. 

• 
There is a new Preference which lets you choose a different language for certain labels in the program.  Fig A83. 

• 
Two new Preferences are provided to adjust the valve train dynamics calculations.  One allows you to increase the stiffness of the lifter/cam interface.  The other allows you to increase the stiffness of the rocker arm for Overhead Rocker Arm styles of valve trains. The factor you pick is multiplied by the default stiffness.  For example, if you pick 1.5, the default stiffness is increased 50%.  Fig A83. 

• 
A Preference has been added to allow for adjusting intake runner wall friction for the Intake Runner and Port.  The program picks a certain amount of wall friction based on manifold type, Runner Flow Coef, etc. Your choice here will change it by the percentage you pick.  Fig A83. 

• 
A Preference has been added to let you adjust how much valve toss (separation between follower and cam) will be called Valve Toss in the tabular results.  The default used by the program for many years. is .020”.  If the program sees more than .020” separation between cam lobe and follower, it is flagged as Valve Toss in the calculated results.  Your choices will let you pick a certain percentage of the lobe’s maximum lift.  Fig A83. 


New Features in v3.9 B 
New features added in v3.9 B include: 
You can now import a .jpg graphics file of a turbo map to assist in translating the data from the .jpg file into the tabular data required by the program.  Fig A84 – A86. 
Additional features have been added to the Compressor Map screen to allow for easier entering and editing of data.  Fig A87. 
You can now enter details about the valve springs to simulate valve spring dynamics.  These inputs are very similar to the inputs used in Performance Trends’ Spring Wiz program.  Check out our Spring Wiz program for more info on the specifications used for the Valve Spring Dynamics inputs.  (At this time, the inputs on this screen must be entered in English units.) 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 



Figure A71 More Compressor Map Features 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 








Figure A77 “Talking” to the Compression Ratio Calculator, Short Block Specs 
New “CR Calc” button in Short Block Specs, allowing for 2 options. The “Short Block Details” screen is shown below. 
Starting up the Compression Ratio Calculator is shown if Figures A65 and A66 
Total Small End Weight includes the piston, wrist pin and keepers, and rings in addition to just the small end of the rod. This is used in the Compression Ratio Calculator to estimate loads on the rod bolts at a particular RPM.  
Current Stroke and Rod Length used for the Deck Height Clearance calculation.  

Current Deck Height Clearance which has been set in the Compression Ratio utility menu in the Heads Specs screen. See Figure A64.  Ideally you will adjust specs either on this screen or the Compression Ratio utility screen to get these to match each other. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A78 “Talking” to the Compression Ratio Calculator, Cylinder Head Specs 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 



Figure A80 Some of the Advanced Features in the Actual Compression Ratio Calculator  

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 




Figure A83 Language Translation and Other Preferences 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 






Figure A88 Valve Spring Harmonics (Dynamics) 
You must turn On Valve Train Dynamics, then click “See Specs for Dynamics” button for screen shown below. 
Check this box and the simple valve spring specs on this screen will be disabled, and the “See Specs” button will be enabled so you and enter detailed Valve Spring Specs shown in Fig A89. 
When you first turn On Spring Harmonics, the program reminds you that the “Eff Valve Mass” includes the proper portion of the valve spring mass if you are NOT doing Spring Harmonics. If you ARE doing Spring Harmonics, the “Eff Valve Mass” should be recalculated to NOT include the valve spring mass because the Spring Details tell the program the valve spring mass. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A89 Valve Spring Dynamics, cont 
Inputs, help, changing input values are done much the same on all other input screens. 
Click on an input name and it’s definition is given on “Help” frame at bottom of screen.  
Click on choice here to select 1, 2 or 3 springs in the total spring pack.  

Click here for the 4 options shown. 
Click here to save all inputs shown on this screen. 
Click here for more info on inputs and features on this screen. 
Choose one of the Spring Wiz options to import data from yourClick here to save your changes and return to the Spring Wiz program.
Valve Train Dynamics screen. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 



Figure A91 Valve Spring Dynamics, cont 
If you have chosen to Do Animation, this “Spring Dynamics” frame will appear on top of the graph. Click the Do Animation button to start animation as shown below. 
It is difficult to see dynamics in this still picture, but this 3rd spring shows a big separation of the coils here at the position closest to the head. 
It also shows the coils likely touching here at the position closest to the retainer, at the bottom of this animation screen. 
The #1 and #2 spring are maintaining the coils spacing relatively well, showing spring “surge” is unlikely in those springs. 
This line shows valve seat position. When lowest spring line is on this line, the valve is seated. Shown here, the valve (and the coil on the retainer) are lifted off the seat. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A92 Valve Spring Dynamics, cont 
0% is where the coil first starts to leave the retainer. 
For a spring with 5 coils, the 10% position would be half a coil from the retainer. 
For a spring with 5 coils, the 20% position would be a full coil from the retainer. 
100% would be where the coil first touches the cylinder head. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Figure A93 Checking Effect of Valve Bounce on Performance 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices (C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Index 
1st Stage HP Rating, 68 1st Stage Starting RPM, 69 
2nd Stage Added HP, 69 2nd Stage Starting RPM, 69 
32 bit, 235 3rd Stage Added HP, 69 3rd Stage Starting RPM, 69 
4 Valve, 49, 253 
A/F Mxtr Qlty, 76, 77, 206 
A/R Ratio, 122 
Accel Rate, 16, 65 
Accelerating, 16, 65, 99, 100, 236 
Accuracy, 6, 1, 3, 17, 18, 21, 22, 29, 38, 45, 49, 83, 84, 85, 93, 95, 97, 98, 100, 107, 109, 111, 115, 148, 158, 169, 172, 192, 193, 201, 202, 203, 221, 230, 231, 235, 236, 251, 253, 263, 277, 278 
Acrobat, 235, 251, 261, 277 
Act EVLift, 142 
Act Ex FlowArea, 83, 84 
Act In FlowArea, 83, 84 
Act IVLift, 142 
Actual CFM, 76, 180, 181, 183, 219, 220, 221 
Actual Valve Lash, 42 
Adobe, 251, 261 
Air Bleed, 34, 164, 165, 166 
Air Cleaner Shape, 111 
Air Meter, 115, 235, 252 
Angles, Valve, 237, 252 
Anti-Reversion, 22, 24, 103, 188, 189, 191 
Area, 19, 31, 82, 87, 94, 108, 114, 117, 122, 123, 142, 165, 174, 192, 202, 262 
Area Change, 117, 165 
ASCII Files, 5, 1, 74, 125, 130, 232, 261, 277 
Assumptions, 3, 15, 17, 25, 28, 31, 32, 33, 38, 41, 42, 44, 53, 57, 61, 66, 67, 77, 84, 85, 89, 91, 92, 93, 95, 112, 117, 166, 183, 192, 201, 203, 206, 220, 252, 278 
Asymmetry (cam profile), 261, 262 
Auto-Link, 236, 251 
AutoScaling, 236 
Avg Ex Vel, 82 
Avg In Vel, 82 
Avg Port Diameter, 17, 24, 97, 100, 188, 194 
Backup, 251, 259 Barometric Pressure, 63, 64, 75, 93, 123, 222 Baseline, 148, 159, 162, 167, 180, 182, 183, 185, 192, 196, 
Bearing Size, 14, 98, 220, 236, 263 Belt Ratio, 15, 52, 53, 56, 120, 182, 219, 220 Bench Test Pres, 111 
Blow By, 82 
Blow-by, 15, 82, 263 
BMEP, 77, 79 
Booster Signal, 115 
Bore, 13, 14, 73, 93, 98, 99, 104, 105, 212, 221, 235 
Brake HP, 6, 75, 130, 132, 164, 174, 177, 194, 196, 211, 212, 221 
Break Point #1, 70, 71 
Break Point #1, Spark Advance, 70, 71 
Break Point #2, 71 
Break Point #2, Spark Advance, 71 
Brk Tq, 6, 75, 130, 164, 174, 177, 186, 194, 196, 221 
Browse, 261, 277 

BSFC, 14, 78 
Burn Rating (previously Swirl Rating), 23, 236 
Calc Error, 85 
Calculation Type, 113, 114 
Cam, 2, 5, 6, 1, 7, 9, 14, 22, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 67, 72, 82, 83, 84, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 98, 103, 106, 117, 118, 119, 120, 142, 148, 158, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 178, 192, 193, 194, 201, 202, 203, 204, 210, 211, 213, 220, 221, 223, 230, 232, 233, 235, 236, 237, 249, 252, 253, 261, 262, 263, 277, 278, 287 
Cam Advance, 44, 46, 220 
Cam Analyzer, 41, 43, 168, 169, 172, 233, 252, 261 
Cam Bearing Diameter, 98 
Cam Bearing Width, 98 
Cam File, 41, 43, 44, 45, 170, 252, 263, 278 
Carb Signal, 143 
Carb/T-B CFM Rating, 30, 31, 111, 114, 143, 166, 204, 236, 252, 253 
Centerline, 41, 42, 45, 46, 72, 168, 220, 233, 234 
CFM, 18, 21, 28, 29, 30, 36, 37, 38, 55, 57, 58, 59, 76, 82, 86, 103, 104, 106, 109, 110, 111, 114, 115, 116, 120, 121, 122, 157, 160, 161, 163, 164, 165, 166, 177, 180, 181, 187, 188, 190, 191, 219, 220, 221, 222, 252, 277 
CFM @ Peak Eff, 122 
CFM Rating, 28, 29, 36, 37, 38, 114, 115, 116, 219, 220, 221, 222, 252 
CFM Rating CFM *, 114 
Chain, 5, 72, 199, 200, 261, 263, 277 
Chain Calc These Cams, 261 
Chain Closing Cam Events, 277 
Chain Step Size, 72, 73 
Chamber CCs in Head, 104 
Chamber Design, 22, 23, 278 
Chassis Dyno, 235 
Clash, Valve, 253 
Clearance Volume, 22, 92, 93, 104 
Closing Events, 90 
Cmprssr Pres Ratio, 86 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
CNG, 213, 235 
Collector Dia, 39, 116 
Collector Length, 39 
Collector Taper, 39 
Combustion Chamber, 213 
Common List, 132, 136, 137, 147, 148, 151, 171, 172, 173, 178, 248, 250 
Comp Cams, 262, 278 
Company Logo, 261 
Component Wts, 99 
Compression Ratio, 6, 7, 13, 22, 92, 93, 97, 104, 213, 235, 287 
Compressor Eff, 86, 180, 181 
Compressor HP, 78, 79, 86, 182 
Compressor Map, 56, 58, 59, 121, 180, 252, 277, 278, 287 
Compressor RPM, 86 
Controlled Valve Toss, 236 
Coolant HP, 81, 235 
Coolant Temp, 65, 213, 222 
Cooling Fan Type, 15, 206, 220, 222 
Crank Pulley Diameter, 52, 56, 120 
Cranking Compression, 92, 174, 263 
Cranking RPM, 263 
Crower, 2, 261, 262 
Current Length, 94 
Cycle Data, 72, 82, 142 
Cyl Leakage, 82 
Cyl Pres, 142, 183 
Cyl Temp, 142 
Cyl Vol, 92, 143 
Decimal Places, 263, 278 
Deck Height, 104, 105 
Deck Height Clearance, 104, 105 
Delete, 277 
Depth, 113 
Depth in Center, 113 
Design, 16, 35, 47, 65, 110, 213, 252 
Designed Valve Lash, 42, 44 
Desktop Dyno (tm), 262 
Dew Point, 64, 123, 222 
Diameter, 11, 21, 33, 35, 39, 52, 97, 98, 100, 106, 108, 112, 160, 164, 188, 189, 193 
Diesel, 235 
Direct Injection, 22, 278 
Displacement, 6, 92, 113, 114, 263 
Dot Matrix, 146, 236 
Dry Bulb Temp, 124 
Dual Plane, 27, 160, 161, 189, 216 
Duration, 41, 42, 45, 46, 90, 91, 168, 233, 234, 235 
Duration @ .050, 168, 233, 234 
Dwell Over Nose, 235 
Dynamic Comp. Ratio, 92 
DynoSim (tm), 262 
E85, 262 Eff Lifter Mass, 48, 49, 119 Eff Lifter Stiffness, 48, 49 Eff Rckr Arm Stffnss, 47, 49, 117 
Eff Valve Mass, 47, 49, 117 
Element Type, 112 
Elevation, 63, 64, 75, 123, 222 
Email, 1, 2, 251, 261, 277 
EMC (Engine Masters Challenge), 263 
Engine File, 5, 147, 148, 149, 152, 153, 172, 235, 250, 251, 277, 278 
Engine HP, 21, 116 
Engine Library, 1, 5, 147, 158, 164, 167, 179, 252 
Engine Masters Challenge, 263 
Engine RPM, 6, 75 
Enterprise Edition, 6, 1, 47, 55, 58, 143, 277, 278, 287 
Estimated Idle Vacuum, 263 
Ethanol, 262 
Ex Cam Accl, 142 
Ex Cam Vel, 142 
Ex Flow Ar, 142 
Ex Port Vel, 142 
Ex Pshrd F, 142 
Ex Vlv Lift, 142 
Example Component Files, 147, 261, 262 
Excel, 5, 1, 74, 125, 130, 232, 261, 277 
Exh Pres, 38, 75, 181, 182, 219, 221 
Exh Temp, 80 
Exh Turbine Eff, 60 
Exhaust System, 5, 35, 100, 105, 106, 107, 108, 116, 213, 219, 221 
ExPort Pres, 229 
Factor button, 236 
File, Engine, 2, 5, 43, 74, 84, 91, 97, 130, 132, 136, 145, 148, 155, 157, 168, 169, 170, 172, 173, 175, 178, 179, 182, 188, 193, 194, 200, 219, 232, 235, 237, 249, 250, 251, 252, 261, 262, 277, 278, 287 
Filter (smooth) Cam Lobe File, 263 
Firing Method, 32 
Floppy, 232, 235 
Flow at Peak Eff, 121 
Flow Bench Flow, 111 
Flow Coef, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 26, 27, 34, 36, 83, 87, 88, 89, 102, 105, 106, 107, 142, 161, 174, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 217, 220, 221, 235 
Flow Obtained, 103 
flow table, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 220, 235, 236, 252, 261 
Flow Table, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 220, 235, 236, 252, 261 
Flow w/o Runner, 106, 107 
Flow with, 106 
Flow-Normal Direction, 103 
Flow-Reverse Direction, 103 
Flywheel Diameter, 99 
Flywheel Weight, 99 
FMEP, 77, 79 
Font, 236 
Force on R.A. Tip, 118 
Fraction Eng Disp, 114 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Frctn HP, 78, 79 Frctn Tq, 78 Fuel Economy, 251 Fuel Flow, 76, 77, 78, 132, 181, 183, 208, 209, 219, 220 Fuel Octane (R+M)/2, 66, 67 Fuel Type, 66 Full HP Rating of System, 68 
Gasket Bore Dia, 105 
Gasket Thickness, 97, 104 
Graph dyno power curves, 261 
Graph on the Cam Specs, 277 
Graph Set Scales, 236 
Graphics File, 277 
Graphs, 5, 1, 6, 68, 69, 127, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 148, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 181, 182, 186, 189, 191, 192, 193, 194, 199, 200, 229, 236, 248, 249, 250, 251, 253, 261, 277, 278 
Gross Valve Lift, 46, 168, 169, 261, 262 
Grss Tappet Lft, 91 
Harley Davidson, 262 
Headers, 35, 36, 38 
Heat Release, 236, 253 
Heat Trnsfr, 143 
Height, 94, 100, 101, 104, 108, 112 
History, 235, 248, 249, 250, 252 
Hole Dia, 110 
Housing Radius, 123 
HP, 6, 11, 20, 38, 44, 45, 63, 67, 68, 69, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 86, 87, 93, 95, 96, 115, 116, 129, 143, 157, 158, 159, 161, 163, 167, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 187, 190, 192, 193, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 203, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 230, 235, 236, 237, 249, 253, 261, 263 
Idle Vacuum, 87, 93, 174, 263 
IMEP, 77, 78, 79 
Imports, 262 
In Cam Accl, 142 
In Cam Vel, 142 
In Flow Ar, 142 
In Port Tmp, 161, 181, 183 
In Port Vel, 142, 194, 196 
In Pshrd F, 142 
In Tun Pres, 161 
In Vlv Lift, 142, 177 
Include Averages, 263 
Inertia, 2, 16, 54, 65, 82, 94, 95, 99, 100, 143, 214, 215, 216, 236 
Injector Rated Pres, 32 
Injector Rating, 31, 32 
InPort Pres, 142, 194, 196 
Inside Dia at Exit, 35, 116 
Inside Dia at Head, 35, 116 Installation, 5, 4 
Instnns Tq, 143 
Intake Air Temp, 63, 64, 75, 222 
Intake Duration, 7, 42, 45, 83, 88, 90, 91, 92, 95, 96, 169, 172, 177, 220, 221, 233, 235 
Intake Heat, 28, 161, 189, 219, 221 
Intake Manifold, 6, 18, 157, 191 
Intercooler, 54, 57, 61, 235, 251, 252 
Intercooler Eff, 54, 57, 61, 251 
Internal Gear Ratio, 56 
Isky, 2, 262 
Island CFM, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 120, 122, 220 
Island Efficiency, 56 
Island Pressure Ratio, 56, 59 
Island RPM, 56 
KG, 278 
Knock Index, 67, 69, 70, 71, 84, 180, 181, 182, 184, 185, 186, 235, 263, 278 
Know, 97, 100, 108, 114, 115, 123, 124, 160, 189 
Landscape, printer, 249, 261 
Lash, 42, 44, 45, 168, 170, 173, 278 
Lb x Ft^2, 16, 99 
Leakage (seals), 52 
Length, 14, 30, 94, 97, 113, 193, 222 
Lifter, 6, 11, 28, 42, 44, 46, 48, 49, 83, 84, 90, 91, 95, 96, 118, 119, 142, 161, 167, 169, 170, 173, 174, 177, 220, 233, 236, 251, 253, 287 
Lifter (profile) Type, 42, 44, 169 
Lobe Area, 90, 174 
Lobe Centerlns, 91 
Lobe Separation, 46, 89, 261 
Logo, Company, 261 
LSx, 262 
LTx, 262 
Lunati, 2, 262 
Mach #, 82, 83, 219, 221 Main Bearing Diameter, 98 Main Bearing Width, 98 Main Venturi Dia, 115 Main Venturi Flow, 115 Manifold Type, 27, 29, 30, 85, 160, 189, 216, 251 Map Barometer, 121 Map Temperature, 121 Material/Coating, 14, 23 Max Boost Limit, 53, 57, 61, 179 Max Lobe Lift, 42, 45, 46, 91, 169 Max Safe Impeller RPM, 57 Max Valve Lift, 278 Maximum Flow, Turbo, 252 Mech Eff, 79, 86, 211, 212 Mech Friction, 52 Metric, 63, 64, 74, 252, 263 Millimeters, 235 Motoring HP, 78, 79, 86, 219, 220, 221 Mufflers, 38, 116 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Mx Cyl Pres, 70, 71, 80 Mx Cyl Tmp, 80 
Nitrous, 6, 67, 68, 77, 179, 183, 213 
Nitrous Oxide, 5, 63, 67, 68, 69, 76, 77, 81, 88, 96, 179, 183, 184, 210, 213, 236 
Nozzle Area, 123, 253 
Nozzle Diameter, Turbo Turbine, 60, 123, 262 
Ntrs Fuel, 68, 76, 77, 78, 183 
Number of RPM Steps, 65, 66 
Number of S/Cs, 53, 57, 59 
Octane, 1, 66, 67, 76, 77, 180, 184, 185, 206 OHC, 20, 48, 253, 263 Opening Events, 90 Operating Fuel Pres, 32 Other Format Files, 262 Outside Air Temp, 123 Outside Rel Humidity, 124 Overlap, 87, 88, 90, 127, 174, 234 Overlap Area, 87, 88, 174 
PDF, Adobe, 235, 251, 261, 277 
Peak Thermal Eff., 53 
Picture File, 277 
Piston, 1, 7, 13, 14, 15, 22, 23, 74, 77, 78, 79, 81, 92, 93, 104, 105, 125, 142, 143, 153, 174, 178, 194, 197, 208, 211, 212, 214, 217, 237, 251, 253 
Piston Dome, 97, 104 
Piston Dome CCs, 97, 104 
Piston Gs @ TDC, 81 
Piston Rings, 13 
Piston Skirt, 14, 220 
Piston Spd, 81 
Piston Speed, 79, 81, 263 
Piston Top, 14, 23 
Piston-To-Valve, 237 
Pk Secondary Tuning RPM, 93 
Plenum Volume, 30, 112 
Port Length, 18, 24, 94, 97, 101, 188, 193 
Port/Runner Volume, 101 
Portrait, printer, 261 
Power Valve, 33 
Preferences, 5, 11, 63, 64, 74, 84, 92, 93, 164, 235, 236, 237, 248, 250, 251, 252, 253, 261, 263, 277, 278, 287 
Pressure Control, 32 
Primary Jet, 31, 34, 84, 85, 164, 165, 166, 181, 182 
Primary Pipe Dia, 116 
Primary Throttle Dia, 109, 114 
Primary Tube O.D., 95 
Primary Venturi Diameter, 33, 164, 166 
Pstn Gs, 143 
Pstn Pos, 143 
Pstn Thrst, 143 
Pstn Vel, 142 
PstnSpd, 79, 81, 142 
Pumpng Work, 79, 196 
Pushrod, 47, 48, 119, 175, 177, 205 Ramp Rating, 252 
Rec Area, 94, 95 
Rec Len, 95 
Recycle Bin, 277 
Residual Exh, 80 
Restore, 236, 251, 252, 259 
Restrictor, 110, 235, 252 
Retainer + Locks, 117 
Retrieve, 5, 155, 157, 164, 167, 172, 179, 182, 188, 193, 252 
Rocker Arm Ratio, 42, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 117, 118, 119, 169, 234, 236, 252, 262, 287 
Rocker Arm wo Fulcrum, 117 
Rod Bearing Diameter, 98 
Rod Bearing Width, 98 
Rod Length, 13 
Roller Bearings, 236 
Roots Vol Eff, 86 
Rotating Mass Diameter, 99 
Rotating Mass Weight, 99 
Rows or Columns, ASCII Files, 277 
RPM, 1, 6, 7, 11, 16, 23, 27, 29, 38, 45, 47, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74, 75, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 92, 93, 94, 95, 129, 130, 132, 133, 136, 142, 158, 161, 163, 164, 166, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185, 186, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198, 200, 210, 212, 215, 216, 219, 220, 221, 223, 225, 226, 227, 236, 237, 261, 262, 263, 278 
RPM Step Size, 65, 66 
RPM to Start Nitrous Injection, 68 
Runner, 18, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 33, 35, 36, 39, 67, 81, 82, 87, 88, 93, 94, 95, 97, 100, 101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 132, 142, 160, 161, 187, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 195, 196, 198, 201, 203, 205, 214, 215, 216, 217, 219, 220, 221, 231, 236, 252, 253, 287 
Runner Dia @ Head, 25, 160, 189 
Runner Diameter, 26, 100, 101, 106, 194, 195, 252 
Runner Flow Coef, 22, 25, 26, 27, 35, 36, 105, 106, 107, 187, 189, 190, 191, 198, 217, 219, 220, 221, 287 
Runner Length, 18, 25, 94, 161, 189, 193, 194, 195, 196 
Runner Taper, 25, 28, 100 
S/C Pulley Diameter, 52, 56, 120 
Save, 5, 130, 148, 167, 172, 179, 188, 194, 200, 236, 249 
Seated Spring Force, 49, 119 
Seated Spring Height, 120 
Secondary Throttle Dia, 29, 109, 115, 220 
Secondary Throttles, 29, 220 
See Engine, 5, 1, 6, 153, 154, 223, 237, 251, 253 
Send, 1, 2, 251, 261, 277 
Setup, 138, 251, 261 
Shape, 102, 112, 113, 161, 189 
Show Examples Only Fitting These Limits, 261 
Shrt Circuit, 76, 80 
Single Flow Coef, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 26, 27, 102, 187, 188, 189, 191, 192 
Single Plane, 27, 160, 161, 162 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2009 Engine Analyzer Pro Appendices 
Spark, 1, 22, 23, 55, 63, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 80, 84, 180, 183, 184, 185, 186, 203, 206, 208, 211, 213, 220, 235, 236, 262 
Spark Advnc, 84 
Spark Curve, 1, 69, 70, 185, 186, 262 
Spec to Use, 122, 123 
Spec Type and Name, 72, 73 
Special Calculations, 7, 74, 87, 192, 194, 237, 252, 253, 263, 278 
Spring + Damper, 117 
Spring Force, 119, 120, 263 
Spring Height, 120, 263 
Spring Rate, 48, 49, 119 
Starting RPM, 65, 66 
Starting Spec Value, 73 
Stroke, 13, 79, 81, 82, 93, 99, 104, 210, 212, 221, 235 
Surge CFM, 59 
Swirl Rating, 23 
Test Pressure, 21, 22, 102, 103, 105, 106, 111, 115, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192 
Theo. Crank Comprssn, 92 
Thermal Eff, 53, 78, 211, 212 
Throttle Location, 53, 57, 61, 252 
Torque, 6, 28, 44, 45, 65, 67, 72, 74, 75, 78, 82, 93, 99, 100, 132, 143, 157, 158, 159, 161, 163, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 180, 182, 183, 186, 199, 200, 201, 203, 211, 214, 215, 216, 217, 219, 221, 222, 235, 236, 237, 249, 253, 261, 263 
Total # Injectors on Engine, 32 
Total # Pri. Throttle Plates, 109, 114 
Total # Sec. Throttle Plates, 109, 115 
Total Avg Flow Coef, 88, 89 
Total Cam Advance, 44 
Total CFM Rating, 28, 29, 37, 114, 158, 160, 189, 220, 221 
Total Exh/Int %, 88, 174 
Total Length, 35, 36 
Tq / HP Data on graph printout, 261 
Tuning Pressures, 5, 125, 126, 127, 223, 224, 229, 236 
Turbine Nozzle Dia, 60, 121 Turbo Map, 277, 287 
Turbo Surge, 86 
Turbo Turbine, 58, 60, 61, 86, 121, 122, 123, 179, 219, 236, 252, 262, 287 
Turbo Turbine Nozzle Diameter, 60, 123, 262 
Turbo Wastegt, 61, 86, 179, 181, 236, 252 
Type of Vehicle, 116 
Valve Clash, 253 
Valve Dia, 17, 21, 22, 24, 103, 105, 106, 188, 191, 221 
Valve Diameter, 17, 21, 22, 24, 103, 105, 106, 188, 191, 221 
Valve Lift, 1, 7, 18, 19, 21, 22, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 83, 88, 89, 90, 91, 95, 96, 102, 103, 104, 106, 120, 142, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 175, 177, 178, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 197, 220, 221, 233, 234, 235, 236, 251, 252, 261, 262, 277, 278, 287 
Valve Lift Tested, 103, 106 
Valve Spring Dynamics, 277, 278, 287 
Valve spring motion, 278 
Valve Toss, 83, 175, 177, 178, 236, 287 
Valve Train Type, 47, 48, 49 
Valve Weight, 117 
Variable Valve Timing (VVT), 262, 278, 285 
Venturi Discharge Coef, 34, 115, 166 
Version 3.9B, 1, 6, 1, 277 
Vista, 2, 262 
Vlv Area, 87, 88 
Vol Eff, 75, 76, 80, 194, 196, 210, 212 
Volume, 22, 52, 53, 86, 97, 104, 112, 189, 262 
Volume/Revolution, 52, 53 
Volumetric Efficiency, 14, 75, 76, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85, 86, 88, 93, 158, 201, 210, 213, 214, 215, 223, 252 
Wastegate Is…, 252 
Weather, 54, 57, 61, 213 
Wet Bulb Temp, 124 
Width, 94, 98, 100, 101, 108, 112, 113, 236 
Windows, 1, 2, 43, 138, 157, 201, 203, 217, 219, 232, 235, 251, 261 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 
Appendix 6: New Features in Version 3.4 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.4: 
General Operation: 
• 
The program now requires you to 'Allow' it to run in Vista and Windows 7 (same as right click on desktop icon, then select 'Run As Administrator').  This should make the program more Vista and Windows 7 compatible. 

• 
You can now save a graphics picture file with engine data, which could be a picture of your car or engine.  This picture appears on the main screen, and can be printed out with graphs and reports, or just separately from the main screen.  Fig A 9, A 23. 

• 
We’ve added a global switch to turn Off or On the Intro Help Tips in Preferences.  Fig A 24. 


Short Block: 
• 
We’ve added hundreds of combinations of bore, stroke and rod length examples. 

• 
We’ve increased the size of the Comments box for all components, to allow you  to better 


describe your changes.  This is common to all Component Screens.  Fig A 24. Heads: 
• 
We’ve added the ability to import flow files from Port Flow Analyzer.  Plus version only. 

• 
You can now import head files from some Desktop Dyno (tm) and Dyno Sim (tm) programs and 


those available from Stan Weiss, .flw and .dfw files.  Fig A 14,  A 19. Intake/Exhaust: 
• 
A picture explaining the definition of primary pipe length and collector length is available in the Exhaust System Specs screen.  

• 
The program now shows pictures of intake manifold and exhaust manifold/header types, to more 


clearly explain the choices. Cam/Valve Train: 
• 
We’ve added a new screen to let you do Variable Cam Timing (VVT).  Plus Version Only.  Fig A 13. 

• 
Dwell over Nose (Cheater profile) can now be more exactly defined, to the nearest 2 degree increment.  Also, now this setting can be different on the intake vs the exhaust.  Plus version only.   Fig A 14. 

• 
The program now allows for using a Ramp Rating for the cam profile for more exact cam profiles.  There is also a ‘Clc’ screen to calculate the ramp rating to match certain duration specs at either .200 lift or seat timing.  Plus version only.    Fig A 14,  A 15. 

• 
We’ve added hundreds of new Example Cam Categories (especially Imports and Motorcycles) and cams themselves.  Many are stock engine cam files from John Holm.  Many thanks John. 

• 
The screen for opening std Engine Analyzer Example components now let you select to only show components which match up to 3 criteria you have selected at the bottom of the screen.  Fig A 16. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 
• 
We’ve added option to import Other Format Files for Cam files, like .cam and .scm files from Desktop Dyno (tm) and DynoSim (tm).  Fig A 18. 

• 
The screen for opening Example Cams now show the Gross Valve Lift and Lobe Separation for the cam you selected if you right click on the selected cam.  Fig A 16. 

• 
We’ve added an “Optimize Using These Cams” button in the Example Cams screen.  The program will run each cam you’ve selected in the Example Cams screen and display the 4 cams which best meet your “Optimize” criteria.  Fig A 16, A 17. 

• 
When you change Lobe Separation in the Cam Specs screen, now the program adjusts the centerlines correctly. 

• 
We’ve added a “Clc” button for Lobe Lift being calculated from Gross Valve Lift and Rocker Arm Ratio.  We’ve also added a “Clc” button for Lobe Separation.  Fig A 15. 

• 
Cam Advance can now go from 30 Retard to 30 Advance 

• 
We’ve made some refinements to the Cam Profiles created by the EA Pro to more precisely time them to the nearest 0.1 deg.   

• 
We’ve added .053" lift for rating events (like Harley Davidson cams).  Fig A 14. Turbo/Supercharger: 

• 
The Roots Supercharger type now allows for an Intercooler.  Fig A 19. Calculation Conditions: 

• 
Program now has Fuel Option of E85.  Plus Version Only.  Fig A 20. 

• 
Program now displays the Typical Octane for various fuel types.  Fig A 20. Calculations: 

• 
We’ve increased the Piston Speed limit above which program says is Impossibly High because materials and technology have made huge strides over recent years.   

• 
Idle vacuum now more precisely estimated for super/turbocharger type and size.   

• 
The program now better checks for blank inputs before doing calculations.   ASCII Data Files: 

• 
We’ve added a Browse button to screen for writing ASCII files of test results.  Fig A 21. 

• 
We’ve added an option to include the Special Calculations section for writing ASCII files of test 


results.  Plus Version Only.  Fig A 21. Graphs: 
• 
Program now has an “Edit Printed Graph” command under Format.  It opens a screen where you have several options on how to print your graph, include various comments, etc.  You can now select to include the torque and HP data in a table when you print out RPM data graphs as long as there are torque and/or HP data on the graph.  Plus Version Only.  Fig A 22, A 23. 

• 
Program now has larger Legend Text sizes available (under Format) on graph screen.  Fig A 23. 

• 
Program now prints cursor and cursor values when you print a graph.  Fig A 23. 

• 
We’ve added additional graph scale multiplier for Special Graph types of x 1000.   Printouts: 

• 
We’ve refined the printouts to look better and be more compatible with more types of printers.  Fig A 23.   

• 
The program now better remembers Printer Changes and Printer Type. 

• 
You can now print a Company Logo graphics files on reports and graphs.  This info is loaded in the Preferences screen. You can specify 2 lines of text which can appear at the top of printouts 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 
of reports and graphs in the Preferences screen, under Printing/Graphing.  Plus version only. Fig A 23, A 24. 
• The program is now better at finding more versions of Acrobat and Reader for a printer choice. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 



Figure A 11 Importing Head Files from Other Company’s Programs. 

If the file included port volume (Weiss files only), you can choose to use the current Port Length for calculating Avg Port Dia, or choose to enter your own port length.  
Click here to import these specs.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A 12 Importing Head Files from Performance Trends’ Port Flow Analyzer (Plus Version Only) 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 



Figure A 14 New Features in Cam/Valve Train Screen 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 





Figure A 18 Loading Cam Files from Other Company’s Programs 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 



Figure A 21 New Features for Writing ASCII Data Files 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 



Figure A 23 Printed Graph with New Features 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2010 Engine Analyzer Appendicies 



Appendix 7: New Features in Version 3.4B 
Here is a brief listing of some of the features new in Version 3.4B: 
Accuracy: 
Several refinements to the performance calculations have been made.  We have also added a Preference “Use v3.4B Performance Calculations” where you can choose to use these new calculations, or revert back to the calculations very similar to used in v3.4A. The program has added Direct Injection option for Combustion Chamber design  The program now more realistically simulates cam profiles for OHC valve trains. 
The program has about 100 more example Complete Engine files. The program has hundreds more example components, like Heads and Camshafts.  GM LS Cams and Heads are now a separate category. 
The program now shows "Peak Int. Sec. Tune RPM" in the Special Calculations section so you can see if the program is simulating 
Secondary Intake Tuning Effects.   New Roots type superchargers have been added similar to those in Engine Analyzer Pro:  Modern Screw Type and Modern 2000+ Screw Type. 
When reading Engine Analyzer Pro files, the program now better determines the individual port flow efficiencies when the file has a 
full flow curve. The program has updated the Piston Speed recommendations in the Analyze Performance reports.  AnalysisReport.txt is now done in Notepad for easier reading, printing, editing, copying, etc for the user.  The Analysis Report also has an improved header for printouts.   
Operation: 
The program will now more reliably open your default internet browser to accessing the internet. Fixed bug where canceling from printing to a PDF printer could cause program to stop.   The Preview when opening a Saved File now includes more info about the engine. The method for displaying a PDF file (like the User Manual) has been updated to be more compatible with more operating systems. The method for opening a file or page on the internet has been updated to be more compatible with more operating systems.   The program has eliminated repeating error messages, or repetitive questions about printing in landscape vs portrait orientation. The program now keeps the Case (upper and lower) of the Graph Titles from History Log.  This way what you enter will be displayed 
correctly on graphs. 
The Graph menu items of Background Color, Grid Style, and labels for valve lift graphs to include TDC, BDC, are now properly marked with check marks for the current setting. There is a new Preference “Use Larger Fonts on Output Grid”  that lets you increase font size for calculations output data table.  The 
Special Calculations section font has been changed to Courier New to allow for changing font size. 
Many Help screens are now shown in Notepad so you can save or print them.  Prior to this, they would be displayed on 1 or more 
separate screens without any options like printing. Files and folders you delete are now actually sent to the Recycle Bin so they can be recovered later if you want.   Features have been added so input screens can be resized and the size and location is remembered for next time the screen is open. You can now stop displaying the Opening Warning screen when you start the program with a check box for “Don’t show this again”. Several screens have been increased in size to allow for longer file names, and to accommodate higher screen resolutions. The program can now open newer versions of Engine Analyzer Pro files. The program will now display all columns in History Log.  Prior to this the columns of “Graph?” and “Graph Title” were sometimes 
hidden. The program now allows Graph File Names up to 30 characters long. A bug was fixed where the software would check for reasonable lash settings even if the cam was Hydraulic prior to calculations.   Now the list of Example components is not updated if the criteria box for searching is blank. For example, if you have requested to 
look for Duration less than some amount, but the text box for the amount is blank, the example list is not updated.  This can make the process of searching for examples more efficient and quicker. 
The program now explains why you can not open very old files from Engine Analyzer Pro, rather than just not opening them.   The Program now checks the configuration file after it is written and makes a backup copy. If a problem is sensed in the configuration file the next time the program starts, the backup configuration file is used.   
The program has a bug fixed which avoids problems opening History Log on VERY high resolution screens.   Changed Preference "Main Screen Enlarged to Fill Screen" to "Main Screen Fonts Increase w Screen Size".  Now you can also resize and reposition the main screen and it is remembered the next time you start the program.  If you set this Preference to No, then the 
fonts will stay the original size, but the picture area will be large. If you set this Preference to Yes, then the fonts will grow in size, but the picture area will stay relatively small. The program has a new Preference "Allow Input Screens to be Resized" to let you resize and reposition the component screens, like 
Short Block, Heads, etc. The size and position is remembered each time you open a screen, and the next time you start the program. 
Set this to No (the default) and the screens stay relatively small, stay in their default positions, and can be faster loading. The default Font Size on the main screen is now larger to show up better on higher resolution screens, even without changing any Preferences. 
The program has removed 2 Preferences:  “Beginner User” setting and the option to not "Show Open/Close Events in Cam Specs".  Most users wanted Experienced User features and the program to show the Cam Events. There is now a "Make Microsoft Excel File" option for creating ASCII files from the calculated results.   
Optimize Feature, Plus Version Only: 
Several changes to the Optimize feature have been made, so that more accurate answers can be found for more possible combinations.  For example, the program now assumes the optimum cam durations are larger if the RPM range for the calculations is high. 
An Optimize option of "Only Check Cam Specs close to the original Specs" has been added.  If the program's standard "Optimize" feature can not find optimum Cam Specs, turn on this option and the program may better find them. 
When Optimizing, a display of “Valve Toss” or “Lifter Pump Up” for the combinations found has been added.  This can help explain why an Optimum combination could not be found. 
When Optimizing both Cam Duration and Lift, the lifts have been reduced some to be more realistic for typical cams. 
If Optimize can not find better performance than the engine's original settings, the info message gives suggestions for changes to be made for it to work better at optimizing. 

Figure B.02 Main Screen Fonts Increase w Screen Size 
Set to No 
Even set to No, the fonts are larger than in v3.4A 
When you change this Preference, you will get this message. Restart the program to see the true effect. 
Set to Yes. 
Picture screen remains small 
Fonts for most all items are much larger. 




Figure B.08 More Example Complete Engines and Deleting Files 
Now 213 Example Engines provided with program (was 112) 
Screen is wider to allow for much longer file names 
If you choose to Open one of your Saved Engine Files, highlight it by clicking on it, then select to Delete it, the file now goes to your computer’s Recycle bin. This way you can restore it if you make a mistake. The Delete button is not shown if you choose to open an Example file provided with the program. You can not delete these files. 

Figure B.10 New Help Options 
Click Help to bring up Help Options. 
Click here to see the Readme.doc file on the web. Then you can see what updates have been published.
Click About… to see the complete version number for your software, like v3.4 B.012. 
Displaying these PDF files should work better on most all computers. 
Click on About to see the complete version number for your program. 
Check the Readme.doc file on the web to see the latest version which is available, and a list of updates since your program’s version. For example, if the Readme.doc file on the web showed updates up to v3.4 B.019, it should show you updates for the 10 minor version updates you have missed. 
Figure B.11 New Optimize Features, Plus Version Only 
Click the Optimize button to bring up this screen. 
Some Intake or Exhaust specs may be disabled (grayed out) if the “Type” in their screens is set to a Generic Type, like “Typical Street Dual Plane”. 
Valve Toss or Lifter Pump Up is shown here. If either is encountered, power may be significantly limited at some of the RPMs tested. 
This message can give info on how to interpret the results. For example, if Severe Valve Toss is encountered, you should maybe improve the valve train design and try again. Or you should realize that power may be limited by Valve Toss in the RPM range tested. 
If you think the current cam specs are near optimum, check this box. Then the program will concentrate only on cam specs fairly similar to what your current cam specs are. Otherwise the program could try durations from, say, 160 to 340 degrees, and could miss a combination close to what you have now. 
Appendix 11: New Features in v 3.9 A 
Engine Analyzer Pro has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v2.1 for Windows. These include v2.1 B, v2.1C, v2.1D, v3.3, v3.5 and now v3.9.  Here is a brief listing of some of the features new since v3.5 was released, including Version 3.9: 
New Features: 
The screen for opening standard Engine Analyzer Example Cams now shows the Gross Valve Lift and Lobe Separation for the cam you selected if you right click on the selected cam.  Fig A44. 
The screen for opening standard Engine Analyzer Example components now lets you select to only show components which match up to 3 criteria you have selected at the bottom of the screen.  For example, you can choose to only show “Crower” cams with a lobe lift greater than .330 inches.  Fig A44. 
The screen to pick a Category of standard Engine Analyzer examples is now more intuitively obvious as to how it works, and it also remembers your last choices which will save time when you use this feature often.  Fig A43. 
We’ve now added 'Chain Calc These Cams' button when displaying standard Engine Analyzer example cams.  This will have the program calculate performance for all cams in the list which meet the criteria of ‘Show Examples Only Fitting These Limits'.    Fig A44. 
You can include a graphics file, which could be your company logo, when printing graphs and reports.  This file is loaded in via the Preferences screen. Fig A45 and Fig A49. 
You can include add dyno power curves which you have entered manually to a graph.  This lets you make comparisons between actual dyno performance and the Engine Analyzer Pro’s simulated results.  Soon we will be exporting power runs from our Dyno DataMite software to the Engine Analyzer Pro.  The default location for these files is the “engine” folder in the Engine Analyzer Pro v3.9 folder.  Fig A48. 
You can now import Cam Analyzer files almost seamlessly.  The Pro will now install the cam nearly exactly as measured, even if the lobe is asymmetric.  Fig A56. 
You can now email results as a simple text file now in Print Options, which does not require a PDF writer program like Adobe Acrobat. 
Program now remembers the ASCII file name and path, and which data channels have been selected to be output in an ASCII file. 
Program now better accommodates the first column in printouts if the title in the left column is very long, like for a chain calculation.  Fig A44. 
A new Preference has been added under "General Operation, cont" tab to let you hide the Progress Bar during calculations.  This lets you minimize the program during calculations to work with other programs, which can be very handy when doing long chain calculations.  Fig A45.   
We’ve now added Delete Row and Insert Row buttons to the Flow Table screens in Head Specs.  Fig A47. 
You can now select to include the torque and HP data when you print out RPM data graphs as long as there are torque and/or HP data on the graph.  Click on the Tq / HP Data option.  Fig A49.   
The program now has a separate ASCII File command in the Output Screen to make it more obvious you can export the data as ASCII data. 
Now program can now better find newer versions of Acrobat or Acrobat Reader to display the user’s manual, supplements, and more.  You can also ‘browse’ to find Adobe Acrobat in the Preferences screen.  Also, the program now allows other “PDF Writing” programs produce PDF files for emailing, other than just Adobe programs. 
Program now better remembers the printer you have selected and landscape vs portrait when you click on Windows Printer Setup in various screens.   
Some printouts now use a proportional font for better printouts. 
Program now remembers its screen position and window size and restores it when it is opened again.   
Now program should require you to 'Allow' it to run in Vista (same as right click on desktop icon, then select Run As Administrator').  This should make the program more Vista compatible. 
New Inputs: 
The program now lets you enter various types of ethanol fuels, like E85, and other percents of ethanol and gasoline.  It now also has a Richness factor input which makes it easier to pick different types of fuels and richness factors.  Fig A50. 
You can now specify a variable cam timing, or Variable Valve Timing (VVT).  This lets you specify a particular RPM where the program switches from the base cam timing to a modified cam timing and lift.  This can be for the intake and/or cam profiles.  Fig A53. 
You can now specify an amount of Asymmetry to a cam profile being created in the program.  Fig A52. 
You can now specify up to 6 break points in spark curve.  It was previously limited to just 4. 
We’ve added a “Clc” button for Lobe Lift being calculated from Gross Valve Lift and Rocker Arm Ratio in the Cam Specs. 
We’ve added several general intake manifold types.  These choices let you pick a manifold type and the program will estimate various measurements based on the engine size and intake port size in the Head Specs screen.  You can see what the program has estimated for these specs.  Then if you change the type to “Use Specs Below”, you can modify these to your liking.  Fig A51. 
The Centrifugal Superchargers now have a Max Airflow input.  This allows the program to better fine tune the supercharger performance map within its calculations.  
We’ve added hundreds of new standard Engine Analyzer Example cams, including Comp Cams, Crower, Isky, Lunati, Harley Davidson, and production cams.  Hundreds of these are for stock engines courtesy of John Holm.  Many thanks John.  Many of the Harley Davidson cams are courtesy of Stephen Mullen of S&P Mullen Enterprises, Inc www.Nightrider.com or www.tuneyourharley.com . Many thanks Stephen. 
We’ve added several new standard Engine Analyzer Example cam categories, especially Imports.  Fig A43. 
You can now specify .053" lift for rating cam events (like Harley Davidson cams).   
We’ve added an option to import Other Format Files for Head files, like .flw and .dfw files from Desktop Dyno (tm) and DynoSim (tm).  Hundreds of compatible head files with flow data, valve sizes, and some with port volume (not available with typical Desktop Dyno or D ynoSim files) are available via Stan Weiss at http://users.erols.com/srweiss/tablehdc.htm You can purchase a CD from Stan with all the files or just visit his site for free info for your particular heads.  I believe if you purchase the CD, everything will be in the correct format and you may have additional data not free on the website, like port volume.  Note:  Not all head files have port volume, material, etc.  Fig A54. 
We’ve added an option to import Other Format Files for Cam files, like .cam and .scm files from Desktop Dyno (tm) and DynoSim (tm).  Fig A55.   
Program now has section for storing comments about the valve train dynamics specs. 
We’ve added several new Chevy LSx and LTx example files of both Components and Total Engines courtesy of Aaron Anderson. Many thanks Aaron. 
We’ve added many example Garrett turbocharger files, courtesy of Bjn Deildok of SWR Performance, Norway.  Many thanks Bjorn. 
We’ve added the ability to calculate turbo turbine Nozzle Diameter based on exhaust turbine flow data. 
The program now asks if you want to use an unrecognized cam file format.  This can help if you have a file which is not exactly the correct format but still useable. 
New Outputs: 
We’ve added Sq In Area and Port Volume to the Head Specs screen. 
We’ve added a new Preference under "Calculations, cont" tab to let you pick the number of decimal places to use to display torque and HP. This does NOT improve the accuracy of the calculations.  Fig A46. We’ve added 2 new Preferences to allow all or user selected outputs to be displayed in Metric units.  Fig A46. 
We’ve modified the Preference setting of  'Include Averages in Chain Results' to 'Chain Results Include' either No Averages, Average Tq and HP, and now Avgs + Engine Masters Challenge.  The Chain Calculations now include the engine Displacement in CID with Idle Vacuum to provide the info necessary for this calculation.  The calculation is: 
   Engine Masters Challenge Score = (Avg Tq + Avg HP) x 1000 / cid 
The Average torque and HP is calculated over the RPM range you have selected to calculate.  The Engine Masters Challenge rules can change from year to year, and will determine the RPM range.  You can also rank your chain results based on this EMC Score. See Fig A44 for results and Fig A45 for the Preference Setting. 
Accuracy Improvements: 
We’ve improved the accuracy of Roots Supercharger simulation at very low RPMs which would typically produce very low 
boost levels.   We’ve made some improvements to the calculation about the amount of boost or exhaust pressure required to blow the valves off their seat. 
We’ve made some improvements to the tables of Spring Force vs Spring Height, available in the Valve Train Dynamics screen. 
We’ve added a Preference for Filter (smooth) Cam Lobe File data.  Since Cam File data can come from many different sources, it may be best to set this to Yes, especially if you are doing Valve Train Dynamics.  Fig A45.  If you are using a Cam Lobe File for either the intake or exhaust lobe, then the velocity and acceleration data for this lobe will 
be filtered also. 
We’ve increased the "Number of Cam Bearings" allowed up to 40 (was 20) for calculating Bearing Size Coef. in Short Block Specs. We’ve fixed a bug where direct acting OHC buckets would show valve toss at very low RPM (less than 1000) due to math 
problem.   We’ve refined the blow-by calculations, so that the amount of leakage also reflects a loss of fuel energy due to lost fuel.   The program now allows for up to 20 degrees cam advance or retard. We’ve made refinements to the Estimated Idle Vacuum in the Special Calculations section.  Now it is based on the Barometer 
setting in the Calculation Conditions screen, supercharger type, and some other refinements. We’ve added a Preference to have Cranking Compression calculated by cranking RPM, barometric pressure, and cylinder leakage, or just the simpler v3.5 and earlier versions.  For a little background, if there is any leakage as specified in the Short Block Specs screen, that bleeds off cranking compression.  The faster you spin the engine to recording cranking compression, 
the less time available to leak and the higher the pressure.  Also, the higher the barometric pressure, obviously the higher the cranking compression.  Fig A46. Lifts at TDC are now done with NO lash, to better match what most cam grinders report. We’re now doing a more precise simulation of the difference between aluminum vs cast iron heads for Knock Index difference.  We’ve increased the Piston Speed limit above which program says is Impossibly High because materials and technology have 
made huge improvements over the years.   We’ve made some refinements to the Cam Profiles created by the EA Pro to more precisely time them to the nearest 0.1 deg. 



Figure A45 New Preference Settings 
Choose what to include in Chain Calculation Results 
Setting this to Yes lets you minimize the program when it performs long Chain Calculations so you can work with other applications. 
Choose Yes and you can click on the Browse button to find a graphics file on your computer and this will be included in your printouts. See Figure A49. 
Set to Yes and program will Filter (smooth out) the Cam Lift data file it reads to describe the cam lobe, like a Cam Dr ™ file, Cam Pro Plus ™ file, etc. specified in the Cam/Valve Train screen. 
Figure A46 Options in Preferences Under ‘Calculations, cont’ Tab Choose if you want more detailed Cranking Compression estimated. If you choose Click on the dataIf you choose Yes, RPM Picked, the channels you wantis enabled for you to Pick from List reported in Metricbutton is units, or click onenabled. Click buttons in this section on it to display to Select All or list of data Deselect All. When channels. you have selected the correct channels, click on the Close (keep) button to close this section and keep your Picks. Choose which outputs Choose how manyyou want decimal places forreported in torque and HP outputs.Metric units.   
Figure A47 Flow Data Table Screen (from Head Specs Screen), New Commands Delete the row where the cursor is positioned, in this case, the 1st row. All rows below this will be moved up 1 row. Insert a Row at the row where the cursor is positioned, in this case, the 1st row. All rows at this position and below will be moved down a row and the bottom row will be lost.  




Figure A49 Including a Torque and HP Data Table with the Printed Graph 
Click on Format, then Edit Printed Comments to get screen shown to right. 
Check Tq/HP Data to include torque and HP data table at the bottom of the printed graph. Note: This data is ONLY printed if the graph includes torque and HP data vs RPM. 
Printed Logo graphics file will appear here, as picked in Preferences screen shown in Figure A45 
Data Tables appear here, under the graph on printouts. 


Figure A52 Asymmetric Cam Profiles 
Enter the amount of Asymmetry here. Here, 30 degrees means the actual centerline based on peak lift with occur 30 degrees earlier than the centerline based on the opening and closing points at .050” lift. If the actual peak occurs later (which is somewhat unusual), you would enter a negative (-) number 
Symmetric Profile 
Asymmetric Profile, shown to an extreme degree to illustrate the point. 







Figure A55 Using the “Load Other Format Files” for Cam Files Feature 
At bottom of Cam/Valve Train screen, click on Retrieve from Library and select one of the first two “Open..” options to bring up screen to lower left. 
These cams are full Engine Analyzer Pro format cam files. 
Click here to bring up the “Loading Desktop Dyno Cams” screen shown to the right. 
1) Find the CamFiles (.CAM) folder on your computer and click on it. 
2) Pick the Engine Family of Cams you want to import. 
3) Click on the Create button, to add a Category of Example Cams, as shown below. 
The program will find all cam files for the particular Engine Family you chose from all the sub folders under the CamFiles (.cam) folder you found on your computer (or most anywhere you can browse to on your computer like a network location, memory stick, etc.) 
It will then create a Category in the Std Engine Analyzer examples, where you can compare and pick from all these cams. You can also use all features available to Std Engine Analyzer examples, as outlined in Figure A44. 
Highlight this new Category under “Examples Added by User” and click on Use Category to view all these imported cams. 
Figure A56 Importing a Cam File from Cam Analyzer 





Appendix 12: New Features in v 3.9 B 
Engine Analyzer Pro v3.9 B has many updates, new example engine files and component files, and improved features.  Here is a listing of the features new since v3.9 A was released. 
New Features: 
You can now link your engine file to a picture file.  This picture appears on main screen and adjusts to fit the available screen.  This picture file can also be included in printouts of graphs and reports.  Fig A57-A58. 
You can now do Chain Calculations on Opening and Closing Cam Events. 
Program now has a Graph on the Cam Specs screen to give you an idea of the shape of the valve lift curves, this graph is updated with each change you make to the inputs.  You can also click the graph lines in the Cam/Valve Train specs screen and the data at that point are displayed at the bottom of the graph.  Fig A59. 
The program has several new features for outputting reports as ASCII text files.  Fig A60.  These files are useful for using results in other programs like Microsoft Excel ™.  These features include: 
• 
Option for exporting as simple text (.txt) or files more compatible with Excel, like comma separated (.csv). 

• 
There is a new Browse button for creating names locating where the files are written. 

• 
There’s a new option for outputting the data as either Rows or Columns. 

• 
There’s a new field where you can enter several comments which will appear at the bottom of the ASCII file.  When opening a Total Engine File, there is a new "Compare" button.  If you click on a file name (but not open it), you can click 


this button and see what modifications have been done to a particular file compared to the file you are currently working with. Fig A61. Printed graphs have a new layout which eliminates the left side border which could appear “broken” on some printers. When sending files to vehicle programs, there is a new Browse button for looking for files and programs. The program now sends files you delete to the Recycle Bin instead of permanently deleting them.  This allows you to recover 
them from the Recycle bin if you made a mistake. 
The program now works better if you are pressing the < > and >< buttons on graph to change scales or after changing scales you go to print the graph.  There is a new option on the Graph screen under File called “Email Graph Printout as PDF” file.   The program now has many enhancements for Email Preferences for more modern email servers.  Fig A62-A63. The program has a new “Convert” option to be able to modify the CFM entries on the screen for entering detailed turbo map 
data.  This allows the user to enter data in various units, and then convert the flow data to CFM or increase or reduce the data by 
a particular factor.  Enterprise Edition only. The input grid on the screen for detailed turbo or centrifugal map screen will now enlarge better if the screen is enlarged.  This makes it much easier to read the grid.  Also, now clicking on the Turbo or Cent SC Map will highlight the cell at the point you clicked on the map.  Enterprise Edition only. 
You can now load a .jpg image of a compressor map for more efficient and accurate “translating” its data into an Engine Analyzer Pro compressor map file.  Enterprise Edition only. 
New Inputs: 
The Enterprise Edition has a completely new input screen called Valve Spring Dynamics.  Here you can describe 1, 2 or 3 valve springs for Intake and Exhaust and the program will evaluate how they will work with a particular valve train.  New graph options let you watch how well controlled the coils behave, and if you are likely to have valve spring surge. With valve spring dynamics On, the program will also simulate valve bounce on the seat and how that valve bounce re-opens a valve and could affect power.  Note:  For this first version, the units in this screen are always in English units.  Files you create in Engine Analyzer Pro are saved in the Users Spring Files folder. 
The program now has 2 more types of Roots Supercharger Types to pick from, “Modern” and “Modern 2000+”.  The original Roots Supercharger type (now called “Standard”) is for an old style GMC blower, like a “671”.  The new types represent superchargers installed on production supercharged cars like modern Mustangs and Corvettes.  Fig A64. 
The program now allows for a “ramp” (gradual) change in valve duration, timing and lift when simulating VVT (variable valve timing).  Fig A68. 
The program will now read a “.p” file format of cam file. 
Valve Spring “Compression to Bind” is a new input in the Valve Train Dynamics screen and the Valve Spring Dynamics screen. The program also considers this bind travel when doing valve train dynamics calculations for improved valve train simulation accuracy.  There is also a new “Clc” calculation utility screen for calculating this travel.  Fig A65. 
There are now more Std Engine Analyzer example cams supplied with 'the Pro were available, mostly Comp Cams BB and SB Chevy.   
In Head Specs, there is a new choice for Chamber Designs which are for modern Direct Injection.  Fig A66. 
Program now lets you select which ports to use for importing tests from the Port Flow Analyzer program.  Fig A67.  
We’ve added several new Example Total Engine Files, component files like Complete Heads, and full compressor maps for both turbos and centrifugal superchargers. 
You can now use KG for force for calculating spring force and rate for valve train dynamics in 'Clc' screen. 
There’s a new Preference called "Valve Lift at TDC Assumes 0 Lash" under the Calculations tab.  The Valve Lift @ TDC is shown in the Special Calculations section of the results.  If you choose Yes for this, the program assumes there is NO LASH when checking this lift, like if checking with a light duty test spring.  If you choose No, the program assumes there is the lash the program used for performance calculations.  For Hydraulic lifters, this is typically assumed to be .006" lash, or compliance. 
New Outputs: 
When doing Valve Spring Dynamics, the program has new Graph Options for graphing the valve spring motion, and an 
“animation” screen to visualize the valve spring motion.  Enterprise Edition only. If you choose a Cam File for the cam profile in the Cam/Valve Train specs screen, the program now checks the Max Valve Lift for the cam file, and displays it on the screen. 
There is a new Preference to allow you to pick of number of decimal places for RPM data to be reported. 
Printouts now show proper units for Engine Input Specs in either Inches or MM, depending on your choice of units in Preferences. Bind Clearance now displayed in the Special Calculations section of the Report Screen after calculating performance.  Bind 
Clearances is calculated from peak valve lift from the cam specs and the new input Valve Spring “Compression to Bind”. The Special Calculations section at the bottom of results now are shown in mm instead of inches where appropriate.   
Accuracy: 
The program considers the new input of Valve Spring “Compression to Bind” when doing valve train dynamics calculations for 
improved valve train simulation accuracy. The new Roots Supercharger types will greatly improve accuracy of simulating modern positive displacement (roots type) superchargers. See New Inputs section. 
The program has refined its simulation of plenum volume for race EFI and tunnel ram intake manifolds.   There has been some refining of the Knock Index calculation.  This does not affect performance calculations.   
Figure A57 Picture File Features 
Picture File 
shown here Click here for Picture File options 
If screen is enlarged, the picture file will fill the available screen area. 
File options in Graph screen. 
Options for including picture file in graph printouts. 




Figure A64 New Roots Supercharger Types 




Port Flow Analyzer v3.0, 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C 
User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48152 248-473-9230 Fax 248-442-7750 Website: www.performancetrends.com Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Performance Trends, Inc.  PO Box 530164, Livonia, MI 48153 Tech Assistance for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230 Fax: 248-442-7750  Email:  feedback@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice 
Copyright (C) 2013 PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC.    All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp.  1982-2013 All Rights Reserved 
International Business Machines Corp. makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, regarding the enclosed computer package, its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.   
IBM PC, XT, and AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. Cam Dr is a trademark of Quadrant Scientific. Competition Cams is a trademark of Competition Cams Inc. Blue Racer is a trademark of Wolverine / Blue Racer  Lunati is a trademark of  Lunati Cams Inc. Super Flow and FlowCom are trademarks of Super Flow Corporation. Saenz is a trademark of  Saenz Corp. 
DISCLAIMER Of WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION Of FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE Of SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY Of OBLIGATION Of PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES. PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS Of PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE Of THE POSSIBILITY Of SUCH DAMAGES. 
Continued on next page. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS Of ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
******************************************* W A R N I N G  ****************************************** 
The Port Flow Analyzer makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with engines and Tests.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-Obtaining data to input to the program
 -Interpreting the program's results Before making measurements of or modifications to any Test, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO:
 -Regard the safety consequences 
-Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 
-Read the entire user's manual 
-Obey all federal, state & local laws 
-Respect the rights and safety of others 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Overview of Features 1 
1.2 Before You Start 2 
1.3 A Word of Caution 3 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 4 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 6 
Chapter 2 Definitions 9 
2.0 Basic Program Operation 9 2.1 Main Screen (test data input) 13 2.2 Preferences 25 2.3 Test Options 29 2.4 Cyl. Head Specs 33 2.5 Head Details (Pro version only) 37 2.6 Flow Bench Specs 41 2.7 Engine Specs (Pro version only) 45 2.8 Calculation Menus (Pro version only) 51 
2.9 New Test Screen 55 
2.10 Test Correction Factor 57 
2.11 Electronics Screen (FlowCom or Performance Trends Electronic Interface) 59 
Chapter 3 Output 63 
3.1 Reports 65 3.2 ASCII Data Files (Pro version only) 83 3.4 Graphs 85 3.5 Printer Output 97 3.6 Data Libraries 101 3.7 Filter Test Files (Pro version only) 105 3.8 History Log (Pro version only) 107 Table of Contents, cont 
Chapter 4 Examples 109 
Example 4.1 Flow Test On a New Type of Head Using a SuperFlow 600* Flow Bench without Electronics 111 
Example 4.2 Running Flow Test On Type of Head Which Has Been Flowed Before, Using FlowCom 119 
Example 4.3 Analyzing Cylinder Head Performance 129 
Example 4.4 Engine Performance Estimate Report    (Pro version only) 139 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 145 Appendix 2: Calibration of a Custom Flow Bench 147 Appendix 3: Tips for Accurate Flow Testing 151 Appendix 4: Backing Up Data 155 Appendix 5: Performance Trends Electronic 
Interface 159 Appendix 6: New Features in v3.0 E 163 Appendix 7: New Features in v3.5 173 Appendix 8: Appendix 8: Sharing Data Files 
on a Hub (network) 187 Appendix 9: New Features in v3.5 B 189 Appendix 10: New Features in v3.5 C 207 Index 229 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features 
The Port Flow Analyzer v3.0 program by Performance Trends, Inc is a software system to help head porters, engine builders, and other flow bench users "streamline" their flow bench testing.  The program offers options to record, calculate, save, graph, organize, retrieve, report and analyze flow bench test data.  In the Pro version, flow data can be combined with camshaft and engine specifications to make engine horsepower and torque estimates, and intake runner recommendations.  The Port Flow Analyzer v3.0 is a unique program which will save test time and improve the analysis of cylinder head flow test data.  
Basic Features: 
• 
Capability to tailor the program to work with standard SuperFlow benches, or custom flow benches 

• 
Reads data directly from SuperFlow FlowCom (tm) or Performance Trends’ Electronic Interface. 

• 
User friendly, Windows interface, compatible with Windows 3.1, 95, 98 and NT. 

• 
Can print results using most any Windows compatible printer, many times in color. 

• 
Save nearly unlimited number of tests for recall, comparison and analysis in the future. 

• 
Allows several reporting, averaging and graphing options for analysis. 

• 
Allows you to record at 1 test pressure, but graph and report results at another test pressure. 


Added Features for Pro Version 
• 
You can also record: 

• 
Additional flow data like CFM variation (useful for identifying "unstable" ports),  Swirl and Swirl variation,  Tumble and Tumble variation, Port velocities from Pitot tube readings, Barometer, Temperature (even if its not needed for corrections),  and Humidity. 

• 
More Head specs like Intake and Exhaust stem diameter, throat diameter, port shape, seat angle, port volume and more. 

• 
Over 60 head details like valve spring specs and part #s, valve specs and part #s, seat cutter descriptions, lock descriptions, retainer descriptions, and much more. 

• 
Combine your flow data with simple cam and engine specs for more detailed analysis and engine performance estimates. 

• 
Customize printed reports and especially graphs.  You can include comments for each head graphed and tables of the actual data graphed. 

• 
Write ASCII files for importing data into other computer programs. 

• 
Filter (find) past tests based on certain criteria, like Max Int CFM over a certain amount, certain Customer name, etc. 

• 
"History Log", keeps a running log of tests you have recently started new, run, graphed or reported. 


Please read Sections 1.2 "Before You Start" and 1.3 "A Word of Caution" before you turn on the computer.  Then try running the program following the guidelines in 1.4 "Getting Started" and 1.5 "Example to Get You Going".  When you feel a little familiar with the program, take time to read this entire manual.  It will show you all the things you can do with this powerful tool. 
* SuperFlow and FlowCom are registered trademarks of SuperFlow Corporation. 
See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
Windows XP, Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 10 computer. 

• 
Printer (optional). 


Many terms used by the Port Flow Analyzer and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, i.e. Valve Flow Coef, Valve Area, etc. However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Port Flow Analyzer. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Port Flow Analyzer directory or folder.   
To read this file, use Windows Explorer to find the Port Flow Analyzer directory, usually PFA30 under PERFTRNS.PTI. Then double click on README.DOC.  Wordpad will display the contents. 
You can also read this file by clicking on Help (top of main screen), then Display Readme.doc file. 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Port Flow Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures the legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  All features work in Demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Basic version, or the full Professional version for ten days.  Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”.  This Unlocking Code will be for either the Basic version or the Pro Version, which every you have purchased.   
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your registered code number and computer hardware number.  These are available by clicking on file in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A 
screen will appear as shown in Figure 1.1. 
Performance Trends will provide you an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking code number and click on OK.  If you typed in the number correctly, you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked to either the Basic or Pro mode.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 1.1, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
First, before switching from hand recording to computer recording test data, you should be very familiar with the Port Flow Analyzer v3.5 program and your computer in general.  See the precautions in Section 2.0 and Example 4.1. 
Second, a powerful feature of the Port Flow Analyzer Pro version is its ability to combine flow data and general cam and engine data to make performance projections and recommendations.  These projections can be used to judge head/cam combinations, cylinder head modifications, etc. 
An engine is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible.  Therefore, simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level.  See the Assumptions in Appendix 1 and Example 4.4.  The user must recognize: 
The software cannot predict the safety of an engine modification or running condition.  Please read and follow any safety precautions as described in this manual.  Also, get "expert" opinions before running your engine at an RPM or torque level higher than what it was originally designed for. 
The software cannot make exact predictions of torque and horsepower because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software are estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions will limit the accuracy. 

• 
Environmental and engine conditions, fuel, the driving situation, etc. are never constant and repeatable.   

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help understand how cylinder heads interact with other engine components; what parameters are important and what are the tradeoffs. 

• 
Provide general direction for making modifications.  This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, engine tests, books, etc.  Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all input data. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Also, programs are written by people so it's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your call may help us correct it.) 


Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Port Flow Analyzer from a CD or our website before it will run.  To do this from a CD, simply install the CD in your CDRom drive and the Performance Trends Installation Wizard should automatically start, allowing you to install the Port Flow Analyzer and demos of any of our other products. 
If the CD does not auto-run, then click on Start, then Run, then Browse and find your CD drive.  Then look for SETUP.EXE on the CD and run it to run the Installation Wizard.  If you want to bypass the wizard, go into the Programs folder and run the PFA­32.EXE file. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Entering Registered Owner's Name: 
The first time you run the Port Flow Analyzer, you will be asked to enter your name as the Registered Owner.  During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied.  Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a Registered Code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card. 
Click on Help, then About Port Flow Analyzer at the Main Screen to review your name and code # . 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Port Flow Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures that legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Basic version, or the full Professional version for ten days.  All features are working in demo mode. Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”.  This Unlocking Code will be for either the Basic version or the Pro Version, whichever you have purchased.   
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your registered code number and computer hardware number.  These are available by clicking on file in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as shown in Figure 1.2. 
Performance trends will provide you with an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking code number and click on OK.  If you typed in a number correctly you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked to either the Basic or Pro mode.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 1.2, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Port Flow Analyzer, double click on the desktop Icon called Port Flow Analyzer v3.5.  If you don’t see a desktop icon, click on Start, then Programs, then Performance Trends, and then Port Flow Analyzer.  During startup of the program, you will be given some introductory tips. 
One of these “Tips” will ask if the “last test you were running should be loaded”. If you have just received the program, this test will be an example test which was loaded at the factory. If you have run the Port Flow Analyzer before, this will be the last test you were working with.  If you are just learning the program, it is recommended you answer yes to this question so you have some example data to work with to understand how the program works.  

After these brief introduction screens and questions, you will be left at the Main Screen shown below: 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
From this Main Screen, you can:                                            
• 
Choose to review your options by clicking on the menu items at the top of the screen. 

• 
Open or save a file of test results and specs by clicking on File in the upper left corner, and then the Open or Save commands. 

• 
Add, edit or review flow data or test comments for the file you are currently working with.   

• 
Graph or report the test for the file you are currently working with.   

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for your needs. 

• 
Click on File, then Unlock Program Options to obtain codes to give to Performance Trends to permanently unlock the program (take out of the 10 day demo mode).  See Section 1.4. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help or pressing <F1>. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
In the Main Screen’s blue title bar you will notice the name of the current test is contained in square brackets [ ] (if you did load in a Flow Test at program startup or opened a file by clicking on File, then Open).  The program has several examples of tests saved in the Test Libraries’ Example folder right from the factory. 

To get started, let's try a couple of Menu commands.  Click on the Graph menu command to open up the graph options menu shown in Figure 1.5.  That Graph Type shown in Figure 1. 5 is for intake and exhaust corrected CFM. If this is not the graph type you see on your computer screen, click on the down arrow to select “Corr Int & Exh CFM”.   
Click on the Make Graph button to produce the graph shown in Figure 
1.6. At the graph screen you have several other options available for changing the graph.  These options are available by clicking on the commands in the menu bar or on the buttons at the top of the screen, including the Help command.  The Help command at this screen (and most screens) provide a good background on what the various options are.  For now, just click on 
Figure 1.6 Graph from Options Selected in Figure 1.5 

Click on Help for an overview of your options for this screen. 
Click on Back to return to the Main Screen 
Back at the upper left to return to the Main Screen. 
A Test File is made up of the flow data (test pressure, temperatures, valve lifts, etc) and other data like Head Specs, Flow Bench Specs, etc. This is explained in Section 3.6 "Data Libraries".  Click on the Head command to obtain a menu as shown in Figure 1.7. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
These head specs are used for calculating certain outputs (like valve area, port velocity, etc), and they are useful descriptions to remind you of what this head was in the future. 
Many of the input specifications you see in the various menus may not be familiar to you.  For a brief definition of the inputs, simply click on the specification name.  The definition will appear in the Help frame with a page # in this manual for more info. 
Figure 1.7 Head Specs Menu (Pro version) 

Click on most any spec or spec name, and a brief Help description is given here in the Help Frame, with a page # in this manual for additional info. 
In the Pro version, some  engine specs have “Clc” buttons.  One example is Compression Ratio.  “Clc” stands for "calculate".  For example, if you want to calculate compression ratio from chamber volume, deck height, etc., simply click on the Clc button.  The program will display a new menu listing the inputs and the Calc Compression Ratio from these inputs.  For further explanation, click on the Help buttons in these menus. To use the Calc Compression Ratio calculated from these inputs, click on the Use Calc Value button.  Otherwise click on Cancel to return to the Engine Specs menu with no change to Compression Ratio.  Section 2.8, Calculation Menus explains all these calculations. 
Figure 1.8 Pro Version’s Engine Specs Menu Showing Clc Button
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various performance calculations, read Section 3.6 of this manual called Data Libraries to learn how to save a set of flow data or component specifications or recall information which has been previously saved.  Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 

Clc button calculates the value of these specs based on other inputs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Whenever you start the Port Flow Analyzer (Basic or Pro versions), you are brought to a Main Screen which will look like either Figure 2.1 or 2.3.  If you have not yet selected a test to work with and have not started a new test, the Main Screen is 
mostly blank, like Figure 2.1. 
If you want to Open a previously saved test, you can click on File in the upper left corner, then click on Open (from all saved tests).  You will get a screen as shown in Figure 2.2 where you are presented with a list of saved tests in the Test Library. Some tests are examples provided by Performance Trends.  As you run tests yourself and save the results, you will add many more tests to the library.  These saved files are useful for making comparisons in the future, and can be used as test patterns (or templates) for new tests (saving you considerable time by not having to type in specs which match a past test).  
Figure 2.2 shows that the Test Library is divided into sections (called Folders in Figure 2.2)  to help organize a large number of 

tests. For example, all flow tests for the company ABC Engines could be saved under a section name of ABC-ENG.  All 4 cylinder Ford tests could be saved under a section name of 4CYL-FORD.  This will save considerable time and confusion when trying to located a particular test in the future.  To look in different sections, click on the Folder name from the list shown at the lower right of Figure 2.2.  The list of tests will then be updated for that Folder.  To pick a test, simply click on it from the list of tests, then click on the Open button. (For those familiar with computers, Folders are actually subdirectories or folders in the PFADAT folder. The Name “Folder” can be changed to something else, like “Customer” used in the DOS v2.1, in the Preferences menu.) 

If you are working with particular test, the data will be presented as shown in Figure 2.3.  Notice in Figure 2.3 that a 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.3 Main Screen After Opening a Test File Name of Current Test File Menu Commands of File, Graph, etc. These 

Click on these
give you all the options to operate the program tabs to switch and change test data. 
between the different ports on this particular head. 
Enter most any test comments 
here to keep notes about this head or test. 
Move the mouse over an area on the screen, and a Help description of that item is given here 
This summary graph shows how CFM from the various ports compares. The CFM for the port you are currently displaying is graphed in color, blue if intake, red if exhaust. 
Click on Slide Bars to display more Test Data, which may not be able to fit on the screen. 
Click on most any setting in the Test Data grid to enter flow data.  You can enter or change most any data by hand except CFM. CFM is calculated from the other data inputs.  (Note that in the Test Options menu you can select to enter CFM directly, but this eliminates the other flow data entries like Flow Pressure, Flow Bench Range, etc.) 
Click either in the first column (Point column) or top row (with titles of the columns) to open up an Edit  menu to insert a row, delete a row, copy down a column, etc. 
A summary of critical test settings is given here. Click on a setting to change it (in the case of Leakage air flow for each port), or to bring up the menu where it can be changed. 
current test name is listed at the top in square brackets [ ].  This is the file of cylinder head data, flow data and flow bench specs which are currently saved in the Flow Test Library, and are the data and specs you are currently working with.  If you change the flow data or specs, make a graph or report, it is for this test file.   
If you click on one of the Menu Commands at the top of the Main Screen, you can be presented with screen of specs, as shown in Figure 2.4.  Figure 2.4 discusses some of the commands to enter or change settings at this menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.4, Explanation of Sections of Typical Menu  (Engine Specs menu shown which is only available in the Pro version) 
Names of component specs. Click on them for a description in the Help frame in the 
lower left corner. Name of component file displayed in this menu (Pro version only). 
Standard text entry box where you can type in a number for a spec. 
Drop down combo box. For some specs (like Total Cam Advance in these Engine Specs) you can either type something in the box, or click on the arrow button to select a pre-programmed selection. For most others you can only select from a list pre pre­programmed choices. 

Comment text frame to enter a comment to describe these component specs. These comments are saved with the specs in the Component Library, in the case shown here, the Engine Library. 

Some specs have a Clc (calculate) button, where you can either enter the specs directly (in this case the compression ratio) or click on the Clc button to calculate it from other inputs. 

Standard menu commands which provide the options for closing this menu (Back), 
saving or open files of these individuals specs (click on File, then Save or Open), erasing a set of specs (click File, then New, printing this screen (click on File, then Print), etc. See the sections later in this chapter for more details on individual menus. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Before Running Your First Flow Test: 
It is recommend you becoming very familiar with the Port Flow Analyzer before starting "real" tests.  Points to consider include: 
• 
Unlike paper Test Data grids, computer data from past tests can be lost if back up copies on external disks are not made.  Printing paper reports of a test is another method of "backing up" data.  See Appendix 4, Backing Up Data. 

• 
Data for a test can also be lost if the Save command is not used to save data to the Flow Test Library. 

• 
Perform some "parallel" tests using both the computer and recording data by hand.  The results should agree within a couple of CFM.  If not, the Port Flow Analyzer might not be set up correctly for your flow bench.  Also, check the hand calculations to be sure they are being performed in the way the Port Flow Analyzer calculates results.  Resolve any problems before switching over to the computer.  Note: Port Flow Analyzer is doing all recommended corrections, which you may not currently be doing by hand.  This is a possible reason the Port Flow Analyzer’s CFM numbers may not match your hand calculations. 


Flow Bench Terminology: 
A flow bench is a device which flows air through a test piece at a measured pressure drop and air flow rate.  By knowing the pressure drop and air flow rate, the test piece can be rated for flow efficiency and compared with other similar test pieces.  For engine components, the higher the flow efficiency, the higher the horsepower potential. 
The pressure drop across the test piece is called the test pressure and is abbreviated as Test Pres in this manual and program. Test Pressure is usually measured with a vertical manometer calibrated in inches of water.   
The air flow is generally measured by monitoring the pressure drop across one or more flow orifices of known sizes. The pressure drop across these orifices is abbreviated as Flow Pres for flow pressure.  Flow Pres is usually measured with an inclined manometer calibrated in % Flow. 
The Port Flow Analyzer assumes the test pieces are cylinder heads either with or without other components attached (manifolds, headers, etc).  The program can be used for testing other components, however a notation system for organizing the data will have to be developed by the user. 
Section 2.6 on Bench Specs goes into more detail on specific flow bench features.  Be familiar with the Flow Bench Specs before taking data.  The 

There are 2 basic types of flow benches the Flow Bench Analyzer supports, "blower center" and "orifice center".  See Figure 
2.5. These types can be either standard as available from a manufacturer like SuperFlow *, or "custom".  The various types of benches are described in more detail in Section 2.6, Bench Specs. 
* SuperFlow, SF 60, SF 110, SF 120, SF 300, SF 600 and SF 1020 are registered trademarks of SuperFlow Corp. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.1 Main Screen (Test Data) Inputs 
The Main Screen is shown in Figure 2.6 and is designed to resemble a typical paper data sheet.  Like a paper data sheet, you enter valve lifts, range numbers, manometer readings, and temperature readings as needed.  The Main Screen is made up of 5 basic sections as shown in Figure 2.6.  These are discussed in the next 5 sections.  The rest of this section gives an overview of how a Flow Test is organized. 
Figure 2.6 Main Screen After Opening a Test File 
1) Click on these 
the Test Options menu you can select to enter CFM directly, but this eliminates the other flow data entries like Flow Pressure, Flow Bench Range, etc.) 

2.1.1 Tabs 
A cylinder head's Flow Test is made up of between 2 to 16 Test Data grids for each port, each with a tab as shown in Figure 2.6.  If you are testing just 1 cylinder, the flow test will be made up of 1 intake and 1 exhaust Test Data grid.  If you are flowing 2 cylinders it is made up of 2 intake and 2 exhaust Test Data grids, and so on.  Figure 2.6 shows how a test for 4 cylinders would look.  You move to different ports by clicking on the Tabs at the top of the screen.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
You set the Number of Cylinders to test and the pattern for the cylinder numbering in the Head Specs menu.  You can open the Head Specs menu by clicking on the Head  menu command at the top of the Main Screen.  See Section 2.4. 
2.1.2 Head and Test Options 
Valve Description 
Describes the number of valves and valve diameter for the port being displayed.  Click on this item to display the Head Specs menu where this data is contained. 
Test Time and Date 
This records the time and date at the start of the flow test.  When a flow test is started with the New Test command (click on File, then click on New Test at the Main Screen), the computer's  current time and date are saved as the test time and date.  The test time and date can also be changed by clicking on it here at the Main Screen.  Only one test time and date is saved for the Flow Test file. If, for example, a note is needed to show some ports were tested on a different day, that must be recorded in the test comments.  
Test Correction Factor 
The SuperFlow 110 and 120 bench recommends a calibration test be performed periodically.  This is done by flowing a standard size orifice where the head is mounted.  By comparing the flow of this orifice with the expected flow, a correction factor is calculated and displayed here.  See the Test Correction Factor command in Section 2.10, page 57 and Example 4.2.  For other benches, the Test Correction Factor is automatically set to 1.000 (no correction) and is not displayed. 
Bore Adapter 
Describes the Bore Adapter diameter used for this test.  The Bore Adapter is the cylinder mounted between the head and the flow bench, simulating the engine’s bore.  The size of bore adapter can have a large effect on the CFM flow.  Click on this item to display the Test Options menu where this data is contained. 
Test Pressure 
Air flow through the port will vary as the Test Pressure (vertical manometer pressure) changes.  For most flow tests, it is best if the Test Pressure is kept constant, however, this is not always easy.  For example, you may want to hold 28 inches, but the true reading may be 27.8, or 28.1.  Fortunately it is easy to mathematically correct the air flow to a constant Test Pressure.  This spec identifies the standard Test Pressure you are trying to maintain on the vertical manometer.  CFM will be corrected to this Test Pressure for the current port being displayed.  Intake and exhaust ports can be set to different Test Pressures.  Click on this item to display the Test Options menu where this data is contained. 
Leakage 
This is the leakage flow through the bench with the valve closed in the port being flowed.  Because this flow is not passing through the valve, the Leakage CFM value is subtracted from the calculated flow for each test point.  See Examples 4.1 and 4.2 for recording Leakage and how it corrects data.  The Leakage CFM can be different for each port.  Click on this item for each port to type it in directly.  Press <enter> when you are done typing.  Although many head porters do not check or record leakage, it is a good practice to develop. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Test Operator 
This is the name of the operator who ran the test.  Click on this item for the menu of Figure 2.7 to be displayed, where you can type in a new operator name, or choose from one you have previously entered.  It is always recommended you first check the list of existing operators, so you do not end up with several names for the same operator.  For example, Bob, Bobby and Robert may all be for the same guy.  When you go to look for tests run by Bobby in the future, the search (Filter option) will not show up the tests run by Bob or Robert. 
To pick an existing operator name, pick No for Enter a New Operator, then pick from the Operator list.  To enter an New Operator name,  pick Yes for Enter a New Operator, then type in a New Operator name, which will be added to the list of operator names. 
Test Comments 

Test comments are for making most any notes about the test, unusual observations, customer requirements, etc.  In the Pro version, you can search the Comments for various words.  For example, you could search for all the tests which had the word “unstable”  or  “titanium” in the Test Comments. 
Help 
The help frame will describe what ever portion of the screen the mouse has passed over or clicked on.  For example, click on a location in the Test Data grid, and a description of what data can be entered in that particular column is given. 
2.1.3 Summary Graph 
The summary graph shows CFM graphed versus valve lift for all the ports on this particular head (Figure 2.6).  This is an excellent way to show if the data between the different ports is agreeing well.  It does take some time to graph all ports.  On slower computers you may want to change the Preference “Main Screen, Other Cyl. Graphs” to No.  This will result in faster updating of the Main Screen but graph only the data for the port you are working on. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
In the Pro version, if you are working with (clicked on) a column for entering Port Velocity it will show a graph of Port Velocity or a layout diagram so you know where different port points are located.  See Figure 2.8. 
If you click on the Summary Graph, the Graph Options menu pops up to provide many more graphing options. 

2.1.4 Test Data Grid 
Point 
The point column simply numbers the rows of data, and is used by the program to identify a row of data for messages.  Another feature is if you click on a Point #, the Edit Test Data menu shown in Figure 2.9 pops up, letting you edit the row you clicked on.  A similar editing menu is available by clicking on the top row,  for editing columns. 
Lift 
This is the valve lift in inches from its seated position. If you have asked for L/D to be displayed (selectable in the Test Options menu), a new L/D value is calculated as each valve lift is entered or changed. 
L/D 
This is the ratio of valve lift divided by valve diameter.  For example, if the particular port is an intake port, the valve diameter is specified in the Head Specs menu under Intake Port Specs.  As each valve L/D is entered or changed, a new valve lift is calculated.  You can ask for this column not to be displayed by selecting the appropriate option in the Test Options menu. 
Range 
This identifies the range number currently being used for measuring the air flow, a number between 1 and 9.  The number identifies the Full Scale Flow entered in the Flow Bench Specs menu.  For SF 1020 benches, the actual Full Scale Flow in CFM is entered in this column. 
Note:  If you were using a previous DOS version of Port Flow Analyzer with a “blower centered bench” like a SF 110,  this spec has changed. You no longer can enter the numbers of the holes which are open.  When your old DOS files are read into this new version, the Range # and possibly the Flow Pres data will be changed to match the new data format, but giving the same CFM as before. 
Test Pressure 
This is the pressure drop measured across the head (port and valve) on the vertical manometer in inches of water, called "test pressure". This value should be kept within .5" of the Test Pressure specified in the Test Options menu and as shown in the Test Notes section. 
Flow Pressure 
This is the pressure drop across the air flow orifices, generally measured with an inclined manometer.  For custom benches, the Port Flow Analyzer allows you to use various types of inclined manometer readings.  See Inclined Flow Manometer under Bench Specs in Section 2.6 and Appendix 2. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Test Temp 
If Use Temp Correction is set to Yes under Bench Specs (Custom Blower Center bench or SF 60, SF 110, SF 120), this data is the temperature of the air passing through the head in degrees F.  For intake flow it is measured after the port. For exhaust it is measured before the port.   
If Use Temp Correction is set to No under Bench Specs (Custom Orifice Center bench or SF 300, SF 600, SF 1200, SF 1020), this column will not be present in the Test Data grid unless you specifically request recording temperature in the Test Options. 
Flow Temp 
If Use Temp Correction is set to Yes under Bench Specs (Custom Blower Center bench or SF 60, SF 110, SF 120), this column is made available.  It is the temperature of the air passing through the air measurement orifices in degrees F.  For intake flow it is measured before the orifices.  For exhaust it is measured after the orifices.   
If Use Temp Correction is set to No under Bench Specs (Custom Orifice Center bench or SF 300, SF 600, SF 1200, SF 1020), this column will not be present in the Test Data grid. 
CFM 
Is the air flow in CFM which has been corrected for temperature, leakage and the difference between actual Test Pressure recorded and Standard Test Pressure.  This is the only data that you can NOT enter directly or modify by clicking on it and typing in a new value (unless you specify “Enter CFM Directly” in the Test Options menu). It is based on the calculations from data in the other columns. 
The general sequence of events for the CFM calculation is given below: 
1. 
After each new value is entered, the program checks to see if enough data has been entered to calculate CFM for that row. 

2. 
If enough information is present, the Full Intake Flow or Full Exhaust Flow for the range # identified under Range is determined. 

3. 
The correct fraction of the total flow for the appropriate range is based on Flow Pressure and the Inclined Flow Manometer specs in the Bench Specs menu. 

4. 
If Use Temp Correction is set to No (SF-300, SF-600, etc.), a correction is made for intake and exhaust flow due to any difference between actual Test Pressure and Orifice Std Pres spec in the Bench Specs (typically a very small correction). 

5. 
If Use Temp Correction is Yes (SF-110, SF-60), a correction is made due to temperature differences at the measurement orifices (Flow Temp) and the test piece (Test Temp).  

6. 
A correction is then made for any difference between actual Test Pressure and the Desired Test Pressure shown in the Test Notes and set in the Test Options menu. 

7. 
For the SF 110 bench only, the resultant CFM at this point is multiplied by the Test Correction Factor.  See Section 2.10. 

8. 
The Leakage CFM is then subtracted from the previously calculated CFM.  This is the value printed in the data column for CFM. It is assumed that the Leakage CFM has already been corrected for the factors mentioned in steps 2-4.  See Examples 4.1 and 4.2. 


Stblty +/- % (Pro version only) 
This is a measure of the stability of the Test Pressure for this data point. Many head porters talk about a stable versus an unstable port. This can be based on sound or the “bounce” they see in the test pressure manometer.  The Port Flow Analyzer’s definition of Stblty is the percent of Test Pressure “bounce” compared to the total Test Pressure.  For example, if you see a 1”  bounce in test pressure when you are trying to set 10”, this would be 10% (1/10 x 100% = 10%).  If you only saw 0.1” of bounce, this would only be 1% Stblty. 
This column is only available if you have selected “Calc from Entries, Include Stability” option for CFM Flow in the Test Options menu.  Although you can enter Stblty by hand, it was meant to be recorded electronically with SuperFlow’s FlowCom or Performance Trends’ Electronic Interface.  In the Flow Bench Specs menu you can specify from 5 to 50 data points to be 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
recorded and averaged together for a CFM reading.  During these readings, the program calculates some statistics on the stability of the Test Pressure readings.  It tries to be as accurate at estimating stability if only 5 readings are taken, but it should be obvious to the user that the accuracy and repeatability of the Stability readings improves as you ask for more readings to be taken.  Performance Trends recommends you always take at least 10 readings if you are recording Stblty +/- %. 
Swirl (Pro version only) 
Swirl is a measure of the motion 
of the intake air in the cylinder.  The correct amount of intake air motion improves combustion and improves burn rate, both of which improve performance. It can be measured on a flow bench using Performance Trends RPM based Swirl Meter.  See Figure 2.10. Performance Trends definition of swirl direction is:  Clockwise rotation when viewed from the top of the 

cylinder is positive (+) swirl, counterclockwise is negative (-).  See Figure 2.10. 
If you have asked to record swirl in the Test Options, this column is made available, but only on the Intake ports (exhaust swirl is meaningless).  Record swirl RPM from the Performance Trends Swirl Meter or a swirl reading from a different type of meter.  Enter a negative (-) number if the swirl is counterclockwise as viewed from the top of the cylinder. 
Swirl +/-% (Pro version only) 
This data is very similar to the Stblty +/- % discussed previously, and is the % variation (“bounce” discussed earlier) in the Swirl reading compared to the average Swirl Reading.  If the variation from Max to Min over 10 seconds was 300 RPM and the average Swirl was 3000 RPM, this would be 10%. 
This column is only available if you have selected “Record Avg Swirl and Range %” option for Record Swirl in the Test Options menu.  Although you can enter Swirl +/- % by hand, it was meant to be recorded electronically with SuperFlow’s FlowCom or Performance Trends’ Electronic Interface.  In the Flow Bench Specs menu you can specify from 5 to 50 data points to be recorded and averaged together for a CFM reading.  During these readings, the program calculates some statistics on the Swirl readings.  It tries to be as accurate at estimating Swirl +/- % if only 5 readings are taken, but it should be obvious to the user that the accuracy and repeatability of the Swirl +/- % readings improves as you ask for more readings to be taken.  Performance Trends recommends you always take at least 10 readings if you are recording Swirl +/- %. 
Baro Pres (Pro version only) 
If you have asked to record Barometer in the Test Options, this column is made available.  Record Barometer in inches of Mercury.  (This entry is for information only and is not used in the CFM calculation.)  If you are using the SuperFlow FlowCom, this reading is provided by the FlowCom. 
Background:  There are 2 basic types of Barometric Pressure readings: 
Corrected Barometer: This reading is what you will hear from most any TV or radio weather report.  It is the true barometric pressure corrected to sea level. This means, with the current barometric pressure, what would a barometer read as sea level. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Observed (true) Barometer:  This is the actual Barometric Pressure at the barometer instrument, measuring the actual air pressure at the barometer. This reading will read approximately .1 inches of mercury less than the corrected barometric pressure you will hear from a TV or radio weather report for each 100 feet of elevation. 
For this reason, the barometer you see on TV or hear on the radio should be about .1” higher for each 100 feet of elevation at the FlowCom’s barometer or the barometer instrument at your shop.  It is not important to the program which barometer you record because it is for your information only.  However, to avoid confusion on your part you should be consistent from test to test. 
Reltv Hum or Dew Point (Pro version only) 
If you have asked to record Humidity in the Test Options, this column is made available.  The title depends on your choice of Relative Humidity or Dew Point in Test Options.  Note that this entry is for information only and is not used in the CFM calculation. 
Tumble (Pro version only) 

Tumble is a measure of the motion of the intake air in the cylinder.  The correct amount of intake air motion improves combustion and improves burn rate, both of which improve performance. It can be measured on a flow bench using Performance Trends RPM based Tumble Meter.  Performance Trends’ convention is a negative tumble means the tumble direction is opposite of the direction the intake port would induce.  See Figure 2.11. 
If you have asked to record Tumble in the Test Options, this column is made available, but only on the Intake ports (exhaust Tumble is meaningless).  Record Tumble RPM from the Performance Trends Tumble Meter or a Tumble reading from a different type of meter. 
Tumble +/-% (Pro version only) 
This data is very similar to the Stblty +/- % discussed previously, and is the % variation (“bounce” discussed earlier) in the Tumble reading compared to the average Tumble Reading.  If the variation from Max to Min over 10 seconds was 300 RPM and the average Tumble was 3000 RPM, this would be 10%. This column is only available if you have selected “Record Avg Tumble and Range %” option for Record Tumble in the Test Options menu.  Although you can enter Tumble +/- % by hand, it was meant to be recorded electronically with SuperFlow’s 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
FlowCom or Performance Trends’ Electronic Interface.  In the Flow Bench Specs menu you can specify from 5 to 50 data points to be recorded and averaged together for a CFM reading.  During these readings, the program calculates some statistics on the Tumble readings.  It tries to be as accurate at estimating Tumble +/- % if only 5 readings are taken, but it should be obvious to the user that the accuracy and repeatability of the Tumble +/- % readings improves as you ask for more readings to be taken.  Performance Trends recommends you always take at least 10 readings if you are recording Tumble +/- %. 
Vel (Port Velocity) (Pro version only) 
These columns are for entering port velocity measurements made with a Pitot (pronounced "pee-toe") tube.  These columns are displayed only if you have requested Port Velocity measurements in the Test Options menu.  In addition, port velocity measurements are only entered in 1 or 2 rows, rows with lifts specified in the Test Options screen.  You must have entered one of these lifts before you can enter port velocity data. 
You can enter velocity data either as: 
• 
Pressure in inches of water and have the program convert it to velocity in Ft/Sec.  This is probably the most common method if your Pitot tube is connected to a water manometer scaled, for example, from 0 to 30 inches.  Note that the data in the table stays in inches of water pressure and is only converted to Ft/Sec when a graph or report is made. 

• 
Velocity in Ft/Sec directly. 


2.1.5 Main Screen Commands 
The next section discusses some of the commands available at the top of the Main Screen.  Most will not be discussed here in detail, as they are discussed in other sections of this manual. 
File (see Figure 2.12 for File Options) 
New (start new test) 
Click on File, then New to start a new test. This process will “walk you through” some critical steps to start with a blank Test Data grid, or to keep certain data from the previous test.  Keeping data can save you considerable time since you don’t have to type in information which may be the same as the current test.  The New Test command is discussed in full detail in Section 2.9. 
Open (from all saved tests) 
This option presents the Open Test File menu discussed in Section 3.6, Data Libraries.  From there you have several options to open a previously saved test file from any place in the Test Library, or from most any place on the computer, including an external disk drive. 
Open (from History Log) (Pro version only) 
This option presents the History Log, a chronological list of test files you have been working with as discussed in Section 3.8.  From there you can review a summary of the last 25 to 100 tests, and pick one to open.  This method can make it easier to find a file you have just worked with lately, say in the last couple of weeks.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Save 
Select Save if you want to save the current test and any recent changes to the same name as you are currently working with. This is the file name shown in square bracket [ ] at the top of the Main Screen. 
Save As 
Select Save As if you want to save the current test and any recent changes to a new name or new folder. You will be presented with the menu discussed in Section 3.6 where you can change the test name, change the folder you are saving it to, or add a new folder name. 
Open from External Drive 
This command provides a simple 1 click command to open a standard Windows “File Open” menu displaying the contents of the disk in the external (CD or USB) Drive.  This provides a convenient method for copying files from one computer to another. 
Save to External Drive 
This command provides a simple 1 click command to save the current test file to the disk in the external (CD or USB) Drive to the same name as is currently being used.  This provides a convenient method for copying files from one computer to another. 
Edit (copy/swap/erase ports) (Pro version only) 
This command will display the menu shown in Figure 2.13.  This menu lets you modify Flow Data for an entire port.  This can be useful should you find you have mistakenly recorded data for the wrong port, for filling in a new blank port with data from a previously tested port, or completely erasing a port.  The process consists of: 
• 
First select the type of 'Edit Action' you want to do.  

• 
Then select which port or ports you want to perform the action on.  

• 
Then select which data (Intake, Exhaust or Intake + Exhaust) you want to edit.  

• 
Then Click on the 'Do Edit' button to perform the edit. 


Swapping and Copying are also handy if you want to make a 'stand alone' test of a particular port.  Say you were doing several modifications to a particular port. Each modification you simply called a different Cylinder by setting the 'Number of Cylinders to Test' spec in the Head Specs menu to the # of modifications.  For example, Cyl #1 could be 'Baseline', Cyl #2 could be '3 angle valve job', etc.  Say that the 5th modification was one you wanted to do more analysis on.  You could first Save all your modifications as a Test File, like 'ALL-MODS' for future reference. 
Then you could 'swap' Cyl #5 with Cyl #1, so Cylinder #5's data (the 5th modification) is in Cylinder #1's location.  In Head Specs you could then set 'Number of Cylinders to Test' to just 1, which effectively erases all cylinders higher than the first. Now you could Save THIS file under a new name, like 'BEST-MOD'.  This 'BEST-MOD' file of just 1 cylinder can now be combined with Engine Specs for analysis, graphed with other Test Files, etc., just as if the entire head was like the 1 cylinder, the 5th or best modification. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Print Main Screen Print Blank Worksheet Windows Printer Setup 
The Print Main Screen and Print Blank Worksheet commands simply give you instructions how to do each.  These commands were placed under File as many users will look under File to find these print options.  The Windows Printer Setup lets you change your Windows default printer, paper orientation, etc for printing reports or graphs in other areas of the program. 
Unlock Program Options 
The Port Flow Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures that legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Basic version, or the full Professional version for ten days.  All features are working in demo mode. 
Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”.  This Unlocking Code will be for either the Basic version or the Pro Version, whichever you have purchased.   
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your registered code number and computer hardware number.  These are 
available by clicking on File in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as shown in Figure 2.14. 
Performance Trends will provide you with an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking  number and click on OK.  If you typed in a number correctly you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked to either the Basic or Pro mode.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 2.14, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers. 
Graph 
The Graph command lets you graph several different types of data from the current test, either by itself or with data from other tests for comparisons.  The Graph options are discussed in detail is Section 3.4,  page 85. 
Report 
The Report command lets you create reports of several different types of data from the current test, either by itself or with data from other tests (Pro version only)  for comparisons.  The Report options are discussed in detail is Section 3.1,  page 65. 
Test Options 
The Test Options command opens up the Test Options menu.  There you tell the program what data you want to record (swirl, port velocity, barometer, etc) and other details about the test (like test pressure, bore adapter diameter, etc.).  Test Options are discussed in detail in Section 2.3, page 29. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Head 
The Head command opens up the Head Specs menu.  There you can describe the head you are testing, like valve size, port volume, etc.  In the Pro version, you can also open up the Head Details menu.  There you can record over 60 other specs about the head, like valve/spring/locks/retainers details, material type, chamber CCs, etc.  Head Specs are discussed in detail in Section 2.4, page 33. 
Flow Bench 
The Flow Bench command opens up the Flow Bench Specs menu, where you can describe the Flow Bench you are using. 
The specs in the Flow Bench menu are critical for accurate results. Be sure to read and understand the Flow Bench Specs as discussed in detail in Section 2.6, page 41. 
Engine (Pro version only) 
In the Pro version, the Engine command opens up the Engine Specs menu.  There you can briefly describe engine specs to combine with your head flow data for more detailed analysis. Engine Specs are discussed in detail in Section 2.7, page 45. 
Preferences 
Preferences let you customize the program for your needs and for your computer and printer.  See Section 2.2, page 25. 
Help 
Click on Help for several options to help describe your options at the Main Screen, and for other information to help you understand how this program works. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.2 Preferences 
Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Screen to bring up the Preferences menu shown in Figure 
2.15 a. Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. Preferences may also save time by eliminating steps you don't require. 
Program Title Comments 
Enter most any text here for the First and Second lines.  These 2 lines will appear at the top of printouts and printed graphs. This is a good place for your business 

name or your personal name.  You can change these entries as often as you wish. 
Standard Engine Analyzer Examples (Pro version only) 
These specs let you have access to the same Libraries of simple Cam example specs that come with our standard Engine Analyzer program, v3.0 or later.  If you choose 'My Engine Analyzer' as the Engine Analyzer to use, you must provide the Path location to your Engine Analyzer.  Otherwise, the Port Flow Analyzer uses the library of standard Engine Analyzer examples provided with the Port Flow Analyzer. The major advantage to using examples from your standard Engine Analyzer is you can load specs from additional examples you have added and saved. 
Use Alternate Location for Files (Pro version only) 
Some users (typically those on a network) may need to store their data files in a location other that in the PFA30 folder (the folder containg the actual Port Flow Analyzer program).  For example, you may want to put the files on the E drive so other computers can access them.  If so, choose Yes and then the spec Path to Files will be enabled. 
In most all situations (except for network users) it is STRONGLY recommended you keep this marked No. 
It is also STRONGLY recommended that if you do choose Yes, that you do NOT keep changing this back and forth from No to Yes.  This will produce possible errors when saving or opening files.  This will be due mostly to saving them in one location and then looking for them in another location. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.15 b Alternate Path in Windows Explorer
Path to Files (Pro version only) 
If you set the previously described Use Alternate Location for Files spec to Yes, this spec becomes enabled.  Enter the full path to the new location for the Port Flow Analyzer data files.  For example, if you want to store the files on the E drive, enter the path: 
E:\PFAFILES 
Either before you make this change in the Preferences menu, or immediately after that change, you must copy all Port Flow Analyzer data folders (directories) and data files to the new location. These folders include: 
Test Library (the PFADAT folder and all subfolders) 
   Head Library (HEAD and XHEAD folders) 
   Engine Library (ENGINE and XENGINE folders) 
Assuming you used the path E:\PFAFILES, you must copy the ENGINE, HEAD, PFADAT, XHEAD, XENGINE folders (and their contents, the data files) to the PFAFILES folder on the E drive.  See Figure 2.15 b. 

Create the new folder for the data files. Then copy all the folders using Windows copy commands to this new location. 
You must copy all 5 folders listed above and their contents (files) to the new location to avoid errors. 
It is also STRONGLY recommended that you do NOT keep changing the path.  Once you set it, do NOT change it.  Constantly changing it will produce possible errors when saving or opening files.  This will be due mostly to saving them in one location and then looking for them in another location. 
If this process seems complicated or you are not familiar with Windows copy commands or folders, DO NOT use this option.  Keep the spec Use Alternate Location for Data Files set to No. 
Default External Disk Drive 
Choose the letter of the external disk drive on your computer, usually A .  This is the disk drive which will be first opened when using the Save to External Drive or Open from External Drive File commands at the Main Screen. 
Main Screen, Other Cyl. Graphs 
Choose Yes to graph all cylinders for the data entered on the Main Screen. This provides an instant review that all data is consistent from point-to-point and cylinder-to-cylinder.  Choose No to only graph the data from the current cylinder you are working with.  The only real advantage of choosing No is to save time refreshing the Main Screen on slower computers. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
When Changing Head Specs Port Length (Pro version only) 
In the Head Specs menu, entries are possible for Port CCs, average Port Diameter and Port Length.  As one spec is changed, another is updated to make the 3 specs consistent.  Your choice here tells the program which spec, CCs or Diameter, to change when Port Length is changed. 
Test Pres. for History Mx CFM (Pro version only) 
The program keeps track of the maximum intake and exhaust CFM for each test.  This Max CFM is shown in the History Log, test Preview when Opening Test Files, and can be searched for in the Filter options.  Your choice here determines to what Test Pressure to correct this CFM to for reporting.  For example, a SuperFlow 110 user may prefer 10" where a SuperFlow 600 user may prefer 25" or 28". 
Show Std EA Exmp Comparison (Pro version only) 
Choose Yes and the current specs are shown with the new Example cam specs side by side if you are picking Example cam specs from the Std Engine Analyzer library.  This comparison can be useful in preventing mistakes, but some users may want to eliminate this extra step. 
Printer Fonts 
Choose which basic type of font to use for printouts.  You may not get your choice if your printer does not support that particular font. 
Enter Cam File Directly (Pro version only) 
Choose Yes if you want to be able to type in a Cam File path and file name directly (recommended for advanced users only).  If 1 character is wrong in the path, you will get error messages.  At the time printing, this option was not activated in this version yet. 
# Tests Kept in History Log (Pro version only) 
Pick the number of tests which you want the History Log to hold,  from 25 to 100. 
Printed Graph Width, % of Page (Pro version only) 
Due to the endless combinations of computers, Windows setups and printers, some printed graphs may not fill the page, some may extend off the page.  This option lets you expand (% greater than 100) or shrink (% less than 100) the printed graph to better fit the page. 
Main Screen Graph Lines (Pro version only) 
This option lets you choose the line thickness of the summary graph of CFM vs valve lift for all the ports on the Main Screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
SF Cal. Test Pres. Corr. 
SuperFlow 300, 600, 1200 and 1020 benches have an additional, minor correction factor if you flow heads at a different test pressure than what the bench was actually calibrated for at the factory.  The FlowCom does not include this correction factor. Select 'Do Correction' if you want your data corrected for this effect (should be more accurate).  Select 'None (match FlowCom)' if you want the program to match your FlowCom CFM calculations. 
Graph Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment 
Choose Yes if you are getting breaks in the border around printed graphs (usually happens with dot matrix printers). 
Test Folder Name in Program 
The Port Flow Analyzer saves tests under different folders (directories) under the main folder PFADAT.  Some users may prefer to have the 'Folder' be called 'EngFamily' or 'Customer', depending how they choose to organize their tests.  Your entry here of most any text up to 9 characters is what the program will use to call the different folders where test files are stored. 
Note:  In the DOS version 2.1, these folders were called “customers”.  If you want to match the wording used in the DOS version 2.1, change this word to Customer. 
Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area (Pro version only) 
Select Yes and the Vlv Area in the reports and graphs is calculated based on valve outside diameter, stem diameter, valve seat angle and valve throat diameter.  This is a more detailed and accurate way to calculate true geometric valve opening area. Select No and the Vlv Area in the reports and graphs is calculated based on valve outside diameter only.  This method is like the method used in Performance Trends’ Engine Analyzer programs.  Vlv Area is also used to calculate Valve Vel and Flow Coef, and therefore also affects these results.  See Figures 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 in Section 3.1 for more information. 
See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.3 Test Options 
The Test Options determine what data is recorded for a flow test and what test equipment was used which can effect CFM flow. 
Test Pressure, "water 

Enter the desired test pressure for flowing all ports.  This is the pressure you will try to set on the vertical manometer.  Typical numbers are 10, 25 and 28 "water.  Note that you can convert to other pressures in graphs and reports later. 
Exhaust Test Pressure, "water 
Enter the desired test pressure for flowing all exhaust ports.  This is the pressure you will try to set on the vertical manometer.  Typical numbers are 10, 25 and 28 "water.  Note that you can convert to other pressures in graphs and reports later. 
Number of Rows of Data 
Enter the total number of data points you think you will record for the test, usually the number of valve lift settings.  (Tip: Enter a number 3 to 5 higher than you think you will need so you can easily add points if you want.  There is no problem with having extra blank rows.) 
Bore Adapter Diameter, in 
Enter the diameter of the Bore adapter used for the Flow Test, in inches.  The diameter of the Bore Adapter you use can significantly affect CFM flow, and potentially stability, swirl and tumble. 
Intake Adapter 
Enter a description of the intake adapter, something like None, Radiused Inlet #2, Clay, Dual Plane + Holley 350, etc, or click on the Down Arrow button to pick a standard choice.  If you are using Port Flow Analyzer CFM data in our Engine Analyzer programs for head data (not manifold data), it is recommended you use a radiused inlet adapter or clay. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Exhaust Adapter 
Enter a description of the exhaust adapter, something like None, 6" Stub Stack, 1 5/8" header, etc, or click on the Down Arrow button to pick a standard choice.  If you are using Port Flow Analyzer CFM data in our Engine Analyzer programs for head data (not exhaust manifold or header data), it is recommended you use a short section of pipe, 6-12 inches long. 
CFM Flow 
Click on down arrow button to set the method for entering or measuring CFM flow.  This choice together with the Type of Flow Bench specified in the Flow Bench Specs has a large impact on what columns are displayed on the Test Data grid.  The option of Entering CFM Directly provides an easy way to create reports and graphs for tests run on other types of flow benches. 
Temperature (Pro version only) 
Click on down arrow button if you want to record air temperature, even if it is not required for CFM calculations.  This will add a Temp column to the Test Data grid. 
Barometer (Pro version only) 
Click on down arrow button if you want to record actual (not corrected like a TV weather report) Barometric Pressure, even if it is not required for CFM calculations.  This will add a Baro column to the Test Data grid. 
Humidity (Pro version only) 
Click on down arrow button if you want to record humidity, even if it is not required for CFM calculations.  This will add a Dew Point or Reltv Hum% column to the Test Data grid. 
Swirl (Pro version only) 
Click on down arrow button if you want to record Swirl.  This will add a 1 or 2 columns to the Test Data grid. 
Tumble (Pro version only) 
Click on down arrow button if you want to record Tumble.  This will add 1 or 2 columns to the Test Data grid, depending of the Tumble Settings entered.  (This may expand to include the Tumble Settings in future versions.) 
Tumble Settings, From -To (Pro version only) 
Enter the starting number for the first tumble setting.  For example, if you are recording 4 tumble readings from 0 to 270 degrees of rotation (0, 90, 180 and 270), enter 0 for the 'From' setting. For the To setting, set the final degrees of rotation. In the example of 0, 90, 180, 270 this would be 270.  At the time of printing this manual, these options were not yet activated. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Type 
Click on down arrow button to set the method for determining valve lift setting for the flow test.  Note that most people use valve lift in inches, not L/D.  
Step Size 
Enter the difference between subsequent lifts.  The units will be in either Inches or L/D depending on the Type chosen above.  If you want to record flow at every tenth of an inch,  choose a Type of Inches and enter a Step Size of .1 . 
Max Setting 
Enter the highest valve Lift in inches or L/D you want recorded.  The units will be in either Inches or L/D depending on the Type chosen above.  
Include a Zero Lift (.000) Point ? 
Click on down arrow button to select to include a zero (0) lift point in the data set.  Including 0 can be a convenient way to measure and record Leakage at each port.  
Type 
Click on down arrow button to set the method for measuring Port Velocities.  This will add several columns to the Test Data grid. 
Data 
Click on down arrow button to select the type of velocity data and related data you are entering.  If you select ''Water, then these pressure readings are recorded and will be converted to velocity in Ft/Sec when graphed or reported.  
First Lift to Record Velocity 
If you chose a Type above to record port velocities, you can enter the first or lowest valve lift in Inches at which to allow port velocities to be recorded. At the time of printing this manual, you could not specify this Lift as an L/D. 
Second Lift to Record Velocity 
If you chose a Type above to record port velocities at 2 valve lifts, you can enter the second valve lift in Inches at which to allow port velocities to be recorded. At the time of printing this manual, you could not specify this Lift as an L/D. 
See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.4 Cylinder Head(s) 
The cylinder Head Specs describe the port geometry and cylinder numbering.  In the Basic version, many of the specs shown in Figure 2.17a are not available to keep the program easier to operate. 
Intake Port Specs: 
# Valves/Ports 
Identifies if there are 1, 2 or 3 intake valves per cylinder and how many ports there are for this number of intake valves.  If 2 or 3 valves are specified, both valves are assumed to be equal size and opened exactly the same.  If 2 or 3 ports are specified, the program also assumes all these ports are the same volume and length.  If you have 2 or 3 valves per cylinder, and the ports from these valves siamese (run into each other) in the head, specify the number of ports as 1. 
Valve Diameter, in 
Identifies the outside (largest) diameter of the head of the intake valve(s) in inches. 
Stem Diameter, in (Pro version only) 
The diameter of the stem of the intake valve(s) present in the port in inches. 
Figure 2.17a Cylinder Head(s) Menu Click on File, then: 
• 
New to blank out this menu. 

• 
Open Example to pick an example head provided with the program. 

• 
Save to save these head specs to a name of your choosing. 

• 
Print or Windows Printer Setup to print this screen. 


Name of current set of Head Specs (SB-FORD). You give the specs a name when you save them (Pro version only). Details opens up a new menu for storing more head info. 
Head Comments (different than Test Comments) lets you describe the head itself (Pro version only). 

Seat Inside Diameter, in (Pro version only) 
The smallest diameter of the port in the valve seat area. Usually this is the inside diameter of the valve seat.  This spec is used to more accurately calculate the true valve opening area. This area is used to calculate and report VlvArea and FlowCoef if Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area is set to Yes in the Preferences menu.  See Section 3.1 and Example 4.3.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Seat Angle, deg (Pro version only) 
The overall angle of the valve seat.  For most valves (even multi-angle valve jobs) this is 45 degrees. For multi-angle valve jobs, enter the angle for the middle angle.  Some race valves have 30 degree seats which improve low lift flow. This spec is used to more accurately calculate the true valve opening area. This area is used to calculate and report VlvArea and FlowCoef if Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area is set to Yes in the Preferences menu.  See Section 3.1 and Example 4.3.  
Port Shape (Pro version only) 
The setting of this specs determines if the Port Dimensions in this menu are either Diameter or Width & Height.  This spec is also used to draw the port when Pitot tube port velocity readings are being recorded or graphed. 
Avg Port Diameter, in (Pro version only) 
Identifies the average inside diameter of the intake port(s) over their entire length in the cylinder head.  Usually this can be measured at the end of the port which mates to the intake manifold.  A more precise way is to calculate the diameter by measuring the port volume and port length.  If you know port CCs, enter it in the spec below, first making sure the Port Length is accurate. If you set the number of ports to 2 or 3, this is the diameter of only 1 of these ports.  These ports are assumed to be the same length and diameter. 
As you enter Port Diameter (or Port Width and Port Height), or Port CCs,  or Port Length, the other related specs are instantly updated to keep all values consistent with each other.  The spec “When Changing Head Specs Port Length” in the Preferences menu lets you have some control over what specs get changed and which specs stay constant when changes are made. 
Avg Port Width, in (Pro version only) Avg Port Height, in (Pro version only) 
If you have set the Port Shape as Rectangular (not circular),  these specs are displayed instead of the single specs of Avg Port Diameter. 
Port Volume, CCs (Pro version only) 
Is the volume of the intake port in CCs (cubic centimeters).  This value can be input directly (then the Avg Port Diameter changes to match this volume and the Port Length spec).  Also, if you enter or change the Avg Port Diameter, this value will be calculated based on that diameter and the current Port Length spec.  If you  set the number of ports to 2 or 3, this is the Volume of only 1 of these ports.  These ports are assumed to be the same length and Volume. 
Port Length, in (Pro version only) 
Is the length of the intake port (down the center of the port) from the intake valve to the end of the head port (the start of the intake manifold runner).  For many common heads, 4.5"-6" is a typical length.  If you change Port Length, either the Port Volume or the Port Diameter (or Width and Height) are updated so these dimensions are all consistent.  The Preferences menu’s spec When Changing Head Specs Port Length (Section 3.2) lets you select if you rather have the dimension specs or the volume specs changed when Port Length is changed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Exhaust Port Specs: 
The definitions of the Exhaust Port Specs are identical to those of the Intake Port Specs. 
Cylinder Numbering 
These specs are used for cylinder numbering of the cylinder head. 
Number of Cylinders in Test 
This identifies the number of cylinders on the head which will be tested.  For example, a cylinder head on a V-6 would have three cylinders per head, and an in-line 4 cylinder would have four cylinders per head.  The Port Flow Analyzer v3.0 allows up to eight cylinders per head. If you are only going to test 1 cylinder on a head with 4 cylinders, this spec would be set to 1,  not 4. 
Starting # 
The first or lowest cylinder # for the head. 
Step Size 
The difference in cylinder numbers between adjacent cylinders on the same head.  For example, for a Chevy V-8 with cylinder numbering of 1, 3, 5, 7 this would be 2.  For a Ford V-8 with cylinder numbering of 1, 2, 3, 4 this would be 1. 
Tip:  Often users may want to run several tests on a single port, with various stages of port modifications.  Rather than making several different test files, you can call each modification a separate cylinder.  In the Test Comments you can specify that, for example, Cylinder #1 is the Baseline, Cylinder #2 is with a 3 angle valve job, etc. 
Menu Commands 
The menu bar at the top provides for several command options, some which are fairly self explanatory: 
• 
Back (ok) returns you to the Main Screen. 

• 
File opens up several typical Windows options, many only available in the Pro version.  In the Pro version, you can open and save these Head specs as separate files. This allows you to easily change these specs to match a different head with only a couple of clicks.  See Section 3.6, Data Libraries. 

• 
New will blank out all the Head Specs, Head Comments; and the Head File name will be called “Untitled”. 

• 
Open Example Head File will open a typical Port Flow Analyzer “File Open” menu, where you can pick a set of example Head Specs loaded by Performance Trends. 

• 
Open Saved Head File will open a typical Port Flow Analyzer “File Open” menu, where you can pick a set of Head Specs which you have saved, using the Save command in this menu. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
• 
Save Head File will open a typical Port Flow Analyzer “File Save” menu, where you can save the current set of Head Specs and Head Comments under a name of your choosing.  This name then appears at the top of the Head Specs menu.  This name should not be confused with the Test File Name which appears at the top of the Main Screen.  The Test File includes all the Head Specs and Flow Data, and therefore includes the Head Name. 

• 
Print lets you print this screen. 

• 
Windows Printer Setup lets you change printer selection, paper orientation, etc. 

• 
Head Details (Pro version only) brings up a new menu for you to enter many more detailed head specs.  See Section 2.5. 

• 
Help brings up a series of help screens on the Head Specs menu. 


Head # (Pro version only) 
Head #s can be critical for shops flowing many heads a year.  The program keeps track of #s so you don't assign duplicates or skip #s.  Consistency of Head # pattern also makes it easy to find heads in the Test Library.  If you click on the Head # spec, the menu of Figure 2.17 b is displayed.  This menu lets you pick a new head # 3 different ways. 
1. 
You can start a new Head # format if you select Yes for Enter a New Number Format.  For example, say you currently are using 'Johnson0012' as a Head # for 1 customer Johnson.  Now you have a new customer Smith and you want to start with #s like 'Smith0000'.  

2. 
You can simple use the last Head # used, incremented up by 1 you select No for Enter a New Number Format. 

3. 
Select No for Enter a New Number Format, then select some other Head # (not the latest Head #) from the Numbers list, and a new Head # will be created from it.  This new # will be, either the exact # you picked (typical if you are flowing a head which you have already flowed), or incremented up by 1 if you request it (typical if you are working with a new head but with the same Head # format).  This is a list of the last 100 Head #s you have assigned. 


For Advanced Users:  To delete or change #s in this list, use Wordpad or Notepad and edit the 'Headnum.pti' file in the PFA30 folder, but keep a backup in case you make a mistake. 

Customer (Pro version only) 
Click on the down arrow of Customer to be presented with a list of customers you have previously used.  You can pick one of these customers, or type in a new one.  New ones are saved by the program and added to the list. 
For Advanced Users:  To delete or change customer names in this list, use Wordpad or Notepad and edit the 'Customer.pti' file in the PFA30 folder, but keep a backup in case you make a mistake. 
Comments (Pro version only) 
Type in comments to help describe these cylinder head specs, and the head details if you want.  These comments are saved with the Test File, with the Head File if you save the Head File, and can be printed out with the Head Specs when reports are printed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.5 Cyl. Head Details (Pro version only) 
The cylinder Head Details have no effect on any calculations or analysis.  They are only saved for information to help describe this head and associated parts. You may want to fill in some, all or none of these specs.  You can print out these details with reports and you can search (Filter) test files for specific Head Details.  For example, you can filter test files for all tests which had Valve Spring Open Pressure (a Head Detail) greater than 400 pounds.  See Section 3.7 on Filtering tests. 
Valve Description 
Enter a part # and/or description of the valve, 30 characters max. 
Valve Length, in 
Length of the valve in inches 
Installed Height, in 
Height of the valve stem above the valve guide once the valve and springs are installed, or some other reference point that you use, in inches. 

Lock Groove, in 
Distance down from the valve tip to the top of the first lock groove, in inches. 
Valve Weight, gms 
The weight of 1 valve, in grams. 
Stem to Guide, in 
The clearance between the valve stem and the valve guide, in inches. 
Face Width, in 
The width of the valve face, in inches. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
   Side View of Valve                     Margin 
Margin Width, in 
The width of the valve margin, in inches. 
Spring Description 
Enter a part # and/or description of the valve spring, 30 characters max. 


Note: For the specs Spring Description, Seated Pressure, Installed Height, Free Height, Spring Rate, Max Valve Lift and Pres at Mx V Lft, if you change one of these specs, it is likely that one or more of these other specs may be updated to keep all these specs consistent. 
Seated Pressure, lbs 
The force exerted by the valve spring when compressed to its installed height, in pounds. 
Installed Height, in 
The height of the spring once installed in the head with the retainer and locks, with the valve closed on the seat, in inches. 
Coil Bind Height, in 
The height of the spring compressed so there is no space between coils, in inches.  Note that this spec is compared to the Max Valve Lift and Installed Height specs.  If coil bind is occuring, the Pres at Mx V Lft is calculated and displayed as 99999, indicating a problem. 
Free Height, in 
The height of the spring with no weight or load on it, in inches. 
Spring Rate, lb/in 
The rate of the spring in pounds per inch (lb/in).  This will be calculated from the specs above, or if you enter the spring rate here, the Seated Pressure will be calculated. 
Weight, gms 
The weight of the spring(s), in grams. 
Max Valve Lift, in 
The maximum lift the anticipated cam and rocker arm ratio will lift the valve, in inches. This will be calculated from the Spring Rate if you enter Pres at Mx V Lft below. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Pres at Mx V Lft, lbs 
The force in pounds (lbs) of the valve spring at the Max Valve Lift entered above. This will be calculated from the Spring Rate if you enter Max Valve Lift above.   
If coil bind is detected based on the other input specs, this value is reported as 99999, indicating a problem.  The only way to change this from 99999 is by changing the specs which affect coil bind:  Coil Bind Height, Installed Height and Max Valve Lift. 
Seat Width, in 
The width of the valve seat, in inches. 
Top Cutter # 
Enter a part # and/or description (angle, width, etc) of the valve seat cutter for the top of the valve seat, 30 characters max. 
Seat Cutter # 
Enter a part # and/or description (angle, width, etc) of the valve seat cutter for the main part of the valve seat, 30 characters max. 
Bottom Cutter # 
Enter a part # and/or description (angle, width, etc) of the valve seat cutter for the bottom of the valve seat, 30 characters max. 
Locks 
Enter a part # and/or description of the valve locks or keepers, 30 characters max. 
Retainers 
Enter a part # and/or description of the valve retainer, 30 characters max. 
Spring Cups/Locators 
Enter a part # and/or description of the valve spring cups or locators, 30 characters max. 
Valve Seals 
Enter a part # and/or description of the valve seals, 30 characters max. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chamber CCs 
Enter the CCs of the combustion chamber in cubic centimeters, CCs. 
Ht 
Enter the height of the minimum cross-sectional area of the intake port.  Area will be calculated based on Port Shape specified in Head Specs. This spec could be Dia if the Port Shape is Round. 
Wd 
Enter the width of the minimum cross-sectional area of the intake port.  Area will be calculated based on Port Shape specified in Head Specs. This spec will not be shown if the Port Shape is Round. 
Area 
Enter the minimum cross-sectional area in sq inches of the intake port.  Wd and Ht will be calculated based on proportions of the Port Ht & Wd in Head Specs. 
Material 
Click on the down arrow button to choose between Cast Iron, Aluminum and Other for the material of the head. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.6 Flow Bench Specs 
The Flow Bench Specs describe the flow bench you are using, and any required specs concerning the electronics which my be recording the data. Flow Bench Specs are critical to accurate data.  Therefore, be sure these specs are correct for each test. 
Master Bench Specs 
A critical concept for Flow Bench Specs is the idea of the Master Bench Specs.  When you run a flow test, you are using a particular flow bench, with certain Flow Bench Specs.  
When you save the flow test, the program saves a copy of the Flow Bench Specs with the test.  Lets call this test “Test110” and assume it was run with a SuperFlow 110 flow bench. 
Lets say several months later that you buy a new SF 600 type of bench.  (Or you could have changed any Flow Bench spec:  different bench, different electronics, different calibrations, etc.)  Your current bench specs do not match the specs for “Test110”.  If you open “Test110”, the program installs the SuperFlow 110 bench specs which you used when you ran the test.  This lets 

you accurately calculate CFM and other data just as you did when you first ran the test. 
If you go into the Flow Bench Specs menu, you will likely get a message shown in Figure 2.19, saying that the Bench Specs for Test110 do not match your Master Bench Specs, the specs for your current SF 600 bench.  You may ask ”What are Master Bench Specs?” 
The program keeps track of any changes to Flow Bench Specs, asking you if these changes should only apply to the Flow Bench Specs for a particular flow test, or if these changes represent your actual flow bench, the Master Flow Bench specs. Whenever, you start a new test, either based on a previous test or starting completely blank, the Master Flow Bench Specs are used. Whenever you open an old test file, the bench specs used for that particular test 

are used. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.21 Flow Bench Specs Menu Click on File, then:
General Bench Specs 
Type 
Click on the down arrow button to select the type of flow bench you are using.  You choice here will affect which specs are enabled or disabled in this menu.  
Use Temperature Correction 
Click on the down arrow button to select whether the CFM flow readings must be corrected for the temperature difference between the cylinder head and the measurement orifices.  For custom 'Blower Center' type benches like a SF 110, choose Yes. (For standard SuperFlow benches, this spec is disabled and set to the appropriate setting for that particular bench.) 
Rated Test Pressure, "water 
Enter the test pressure at which the measurement flow orifices have been calibrated for. For example, for an SF 600 this would be 25", for an SF 1020 this would be 50”. (For standard 


only for Custom benches. 
SuperFlow benches, this spec is disabled and set to the appropriate setting for that particular bench.) 
Inclined Flow Manometer Full Scale Reading 
The highest reading # on the inclined manometer.  Usually this is 100%, but could be something different if the manometer is custom or calibrated in "water. (For standard SuperFlow benches, this spec is disabled and set to the appropriate setting for that particular bench.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Full Scale Pressure, "water 
The actual pressure in inches of water at the Full Scale Reading entered above. (For standard SuperFlow benches, this spec is disabled and set to the appropriate setting for that particular bench.) 
Linear Scale (like a ruler) 
Click on the down arrow button to select the type of scale used to mark the inclined manometer.  Select Yes if the scale is linear like a standard ruler.  Select No if the scale is non linear like a SuperFlow % Flow manometer. (For standard SuperFlow benches, this spec is disabled and set to the appropriate setting for that particular bench.) 
Electronics 
Type 
Click on the down arrow button to select the type of electronics you are using to record flow bench readings.  You choice here will affect which specs are enabled or disabled in this section. 
Com Port 
Click on the down arrow button to select computer's COM (serial) port # you are using to 'talk' to the electronics.  It is most reliable for you to click on the Find button to the right of this entry to have the program automatically check all possible COM ports to find your type of electronics.  If it can not be found, you may want to go into the Electronics or FlowCom screen, click on Help, then Troubleshoot and try some of the Troubleshoot options.  You can also check the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) section of our website under “Support” for the latest info on finding a working COM port on your computer. 
Also check Appendix 7, 9, 10 for additional new features added in version 3.5 & 3.5B & 3.5C. 
# Readings to Average 
Enter the number of readings you want to be averaged together for a CFM, Swirl and/or Tumble reading.  If you enter a lower number the test will be completed faster.  A larger number (10 or higher) usually produces more repeatable results, especially if you are recording Test Stability, Swirl +/-% and Tumble +/-%. 
Other Data 
Click on the down arrow button to select the type of other data which can be read through the electronics.  Click on 'See Details' button to calibrate these sensors (and the flow sensors for non-SuperFlow FlowCom electronics) to the program.  See Appendix 5 for more details. 
See Details (calibrations) Button 
This button becomes enabled if you have selected the Performance Trends EI for the Type of Electronics, or selected something other than None for Other Data. See Appendix 5 for more details. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Last Updated 
Time/Date 
The time and date when these Flow Bench Specs were last modified.  An old date is not necessarily a bad thing.  It just means you have been using the same bench for a long time, usually a good thing.   
Flow Ranges 
Range #1-7 
Enter the Full Scale flow for Ranges 1 through 7, intake and exhaust.  This is the CFM Flow when the inclined flow manometer is at its highest reading, usually 100% Flow.  For many types of SuperFlow flow benches, these specs are preloaded by the program and are disabled for you to change.  For SuperFlow 300, 600 or 1200, or custom benches, you just enter the CFM values which came with your bench from the factory. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.7 Engine Specs (Pro version only) 
The Engine specs describe the engine's size, compression ratio, cam and valve train.  These specs are combined with flow data to do more detailed analysis of a head and its performance potential. 
Cam and valve train specifications are critical to engine performance; therefore reliable information is necessary. It is recommended that you use specifications given by the cam grinder or engine manufacturer.  Actual measurements of cam and valve train specifications can be done, however this can be tricky and therefore is recommended to have someone experienced perform them.  Guides for making these measurements are also available from cam grinders and manufacturers of valve train components and are beyond the scope of this User's Manual. 
Important: The Engine Specs menu’s Cam specs update as you change other cam specs. For example, if you change a centerline, the Total Cam Advance number changes to reflect the new centerline. 
Intake Centerline, deg ATDC 
Is the location of the maximum lift point on the cam profile.  If you are using the program’s 

Figure 2.23 Port Flow Analyzer Cam Profile Definitions Typical Exhaust Lobe 

* Lash at Tappet is Lash at Valve divided by Rocker Arm Ratio.  Lash at Tappet is shown only to illustrate lash in general.  Lash at Tappet is not used in program or engine builders because it is difficult to measure. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
standard cam profiles, this is also exactly half way between the open and closing point because the program assumes the same opening and closing profile (a symetric lobe). 
Duration @ xxx 
Is the number of crank degrees where the tappet is lifted to the tappet lift specified as the Lift for Rating Events in the General Cam Specs section above base circle. 
Opening @ xxx 
Identifies crankshaft degrees before top dead center where the tappet has been lifted to the Lift for Rating Events above base circle Base Circle on the opening ramp. (Lift for Rating Events is specified in the General Cam Specs section.) This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs.  If this event occurs after top dead center, enter a negative value. For example, if it is reported as 4 degrees after top dead center, enter -4. 
Closing @ xxx 
Identifies crankshaft degrees before top dead center where the tappet has been lowered to the Lift for Rating Events above base circle Base Circle on the closing ramp. (Lift for Rating Events is specified in the General Cam Specs section.) This value is generally available on your "cam card" or in cam catalogs.  It is highly unlikely, but if this event occurs before bottom dead center, enter a negative value. For example, if it is reported as 4 degrees before bottom dead center, enter -4. 
Max Lobe Lift, in 
Identifies how high the cam lobe lifts the tappet above Base Circle in inches.  If you are given "gross valve lift" by the cam grinder, divide by the rocker arm ratio assumed by the cam grinder to obtain gross or maximum tappet lift.  This can also be done by clicking on the Clc button to open up a Calculation Menu.  See Section 2.8.2. 
Actual Lash @ Valve, in 
Identifies the lash or clearance in inches between the valve tip and its actuator, generally the rocker arm.  If you have specified a hydraulic Lifter (profile) Type, this spec is disabled. 
Notes:  This spec works with the Designed Valve Lash spec.  If you specify an Actual Valve Lash nearly the same as the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened as the cam profile was designed.  If you specify a smaller Actual Valve Lash than the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened longer and higher than what the cam was designed for. And vice versa, 
if you specify a larger Actual Valve Lash than the Designed Valve Lash, the valve will be opened less time and less lift than what the cam was designed for. 
Rocker Arm Ratio 
Identifies the ratio between tappet lift and valve lift.  Generally rocker arm ratios vary between 1.3 to 2.0.  For valve trains with no rocker arms, for example overhead cam 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
systems with directing acting tappets, enter 1.  See Figure 2.24.  The Port Flow Analyzer assumes the ratio is constant although actual rocker arm ratios vary slightly with valve lift. 
Gross Intake Valve Lift, in 
Is the maximum lift of the valve with NO valve lash (even if it is a mechanical cam with valve lash).  Mathematically it is Max Lobe Lift  multiplied by rocker arm ratio.  This is the standard way most cam grinders rate their cams for valve lift, sometimes called Advertised Lift. This number is calculated from other specs in this menu and can not be entered directly. 
Note: If you are not using (specifying in the program) the same Rocker Arm Ratios as what the cam grinder is assuming, this number will not match the cam grinder’s catalog or advertised lift. 
Use Cam File 
Click on the down arrow to pick Yes or No.  In this version of the program, No is the only option.  Future versions will allow you to read in Cam Files describing the cam profile, degree by degree. 
Exhaust Centerline, deg ATDC Duration @ .050”    Max Lobe Lift, in Actual Lash @ Valve, in Rocker Arm Ratio Gross Valve Lift Use Cam File 
Definitions for these specs are the same as for the Intake cam described previously. 
General Cam Specs 
Type 
This combo box lets you describe the source of the specs used in this menu: 
• 
You can select the Use Specs in this Menu and enter in most any combination of Cam or Valve Train specs. 

• 
You can pick the Pick an Example option to be presented with a list of Example Cam Specs  See Picking Example Cam Specs at the end of this section.  It will then display the name of the Example Cam specs you have picked 


The Type you choose has a large effect on how this menu looks.  If you choose Use Specs Below, all specs will be printed in black, and you can change them to most any number you want.  If you have chosen an example, the specs which relate directly to the example will be displayed in blue.   
Should you choose to change any of these blue specs, a notice is given that changing any spec related to the example will change the Type from the example name to the general name of Use Specs Below.  The example name is a handy reminder of what the specs in this menu represent, so you may not want to change any of these blue spec settings. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Lift for Rating Events 
You can pick the lift from base circle at which cam events are rated from the following: 
• 
.050" which was the method used by all our previous Port Flow Analyzers, and is the way used by most cam grinders for American aftermarket and racing cams. 

• 
.040" or 1 mm which is a common metric method used for motorcycles and foreign cams. 

• 
Seat Timing which is commonly used for Advertised Duration by American cam grinders.   


Be sure you are using the correct one, as this will create large errors in the results if you are not. 
Total Cam Advance 
This combo box lets you either pick an advance, retard or “straight up” cam timing by clicking on the arrow key, or you can type in an advance or retard in degrees directly.  If you just enter a number, a number with a + sign (ex. +4) or a number followed by the letters “adv”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam advance.  If you just enter a number with a - sign (ex. -4) or a number followed by the letters “ret”, the program assumes it is number of degrees of cam retard. 
Total cam advance is based on the current Intake and Exhaust Centerlines.  If the centerlines are equal, Total Advance is set to 0 or straight up by the program.  This is a major change from the previous DOS versions of Port Flow Analyzer where the spec Additional Cam Advance was used.  In those versions you could specify opening and closing events which would produce a Total Cam Advance of say 4 degrees, but the Additional Cam Advance could be set to 0.  This was confusing to users.  This new method of using Total Cam Advance should match cam specs used by most cam grinders. 
To change cam timing from how it was ground by the cam grinder you will need special set of timing gears or an offset timing pin, key or bushing. In general, advancing the cam will give more lower end torque while giving up some top end HP; and retarding will give up low end torque to gain top end HP. 
Designed Valve Lash, in 
Is the valve lash the cam grinder recommends you use, or what the cam was ground for.  If the cam grinder recommends a  different lash for the exhaust than the intake, use the intake lash.  Also see Actual Lash @ Valve a couple pages back. 
Lifter (profile) Type 
This combo box lets you pick the type of lifter and the “steepness” or “aggressiveness” of the cam’s profiles.  The combinations consist of: 
Hyd vs Solid Hydraulic vs Solid lash adjustment 
Flat vs Roller Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile (Roller being more aggressive) 
Mild vs Agr Aggressiveness or steepness of the profile (Agr being more aggressive) 
Invrtd The most aggressive or steep profile (being more aggressive than Mild or Agr) 
The choice of Hydraulic vs Solid is the most important as this dictates the use of a lash setting and whether hydraulic lifter pump up is possible in the Engine Performance Estimate report.  The other choices simply determine differences in the steepness of the profile for the same Max Lobe Lift.. Most truly aggressive cams or roller cams have more Max Lobe Lift for a given duration, and milder or hydraulic cams have less Max Lobe Lift. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Lobe Separation, cam deg 
Is the separation between the intake and exhaust centerlines in cam (not crankshaft) degrees, and is the standard method used by most cam grinders.  This number is calculated from other specs in this menu and can not be entered directly. 
Engine Specs 
Bore, inches 
The diameter of the cylinder measured in inches. 
Stroke, inches 
The distance the piston travels from TDC (top dead center) to BDC (bottom dead center) measured in inches. 
# Of Cylinders 
The number of cylinders for the engine.  For example, for a V-8 this number is 8, for a single  cylinder engine this number would be 1. 
Rod Length, in 
The distance from the center of the wrist pin bore to the center of the crank journal bore measured in inches. 

C.R. (compression ratio) 
The engine's compression ratio based on cylinder clearance volume and total cylinder swept volume (sometimes called static compression ratio).  Do not use compression ratios which are corrected for cam timing, weather or supercharger boost. 
Compression Ratio = Clearance Volume + Swept Volume Clearance Volume 
Clearance Volume and Swept Volume must be in the same units, both either CCs or cubic inches.  Multiply CCs by .061 to obtain cubic inches, multiply cubic inches by 16.39 to obtain CCs. 
Since C. R. has a Clc button, see Section 2.8.1 for calculating Compression Ratio from clearance volume, piston dome volume, deck height and gasket thickness. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Picking Example Cam Specs 
If you click on Type in the General Cam Specs, you can choose the Option of Pick Example Cam. If you do, you will be presented with the screens shown in Figure 2.25 b. 
Figure 2.25 b Picking Example Cam Specs 
Click on Type in the General Cam Specs, then pick the Pick an Example Cam option to be presented with this menu, a list of catagories of cams. 
Click on a Catagory to highlight it, then click on the Use Catagory button to pick that catagory. 
This screen shows the individual examples of cams that come preloaded with the Port Flow Analyzer Pro version. Click on an example cam to highlight it. 
Once highlighted, click on the Pick button to actually load in these example cam specs. Depending on settings in the Preferences menu, you may be shown a comparison of these specs with your current cam specs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8 Calculation Menus (Pro version only) 
The following section explains the user input for engine specs listed with Clc buttons.  These specs are ones where you can simply enter a value, or click on the Clc button and the program will present a menu of inputs which will calculate that particular parameter.  These menus are like computer “scratch pads” for calculating specs like Compression Ratio and Max Tappet Lift from other inputs. 
Notes: 
The starting values in each calculation menu are always blanked out.  Once enough specs have been entered, the calculated value(s) at the top of the menu will be displayed.  This calculated value(s) will now be updated each time you change a spec.  If you want to use this calculated value, click on Use Calc Value. If the calculated value is within expected limits, it will be loaded into the original menu.  If you click on Cancel, you will be returned to the original menu with the original value unchanged. If you click on Help, you will be given a general explanation of calculation menus, and a page # in this section for more info about the particular menu you are using. 
The input values or calculated values in any calculation menu have NO affect on calculated performance unless you load the Calculated value into the original menu. If you already know a spec in the form required by the program, then you have no need to use the calculation menu. For example, if you know the Compression Ratio is 10.3, you have no need to use a calculation menu to calculate Compression Ratio based on Gasket Thickness, Piston Dome CCs, etc. 
2.8.1 Calc Compression Ratio 
Is the Compression Ratio calculated from the following specs and the current cylinder volume (based on the current Bore and Stroke in the Engine menu).  Compression Ratio is defined on page 49 under Engine specs.  See page 51 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
The equation for Compression Ratio depends on the cylinder displacement.  This displacement is based on the current Bore and Stroke in the Engine menu  and is displayed in the Notes section at the bottom of this menu.  Make sure these specs match the engine for which you are calculating Compression Ratio before using this menu. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chamber Specs 
Chamber CCs in Head 
Is the combustion chamber volume in the cylinder head, measured in cubic centimeters.  This is the value obtained if the heads are "cc'd". 
If you know the entire clearance volume of the cylinder, but do not know Piston Dome CCs, Gasket Thickness or Deck Height Clearance, enter that volume here as Chamber CCs in Head.  Then enter 0 for Piston Dome CCs, Gasket Thickness and Deck Height Clearance.  The program will calculate compression ratio based on the equation below where Clearance Volume is the Chamber CCs in Head. 
Compression Ratio = Clearance Volume + Swept Volume Clearance Volume 
Piston Dome CCs 
Is the volume of the "pop up" in the piston measured in cubic centimeters.  The "pop up" is the volume of piston material added to the top of a flat top piston. If the piston has a "dish" (depression), enter the dish volume as a negative (-) number. 
Gasket Thickness, in 
Is the thickness of the head gasket in inches after it has been "crushed".  "Crushed" thickness is after the head bolts have been torqued to spec. 
Gasket Bore Diameter, in 
Is the diameter of the bore in the head gasket.  A good approximation is to use the same as the Bore in the Engine menu, and this value is loaded in when you first open up this menu. You can change it to most any value you want. (In actual use, gasket bores are usually .030-.100” larger than the cylinder bore.) 
Deck Height Clearance, in 
Deck Height Clearance is the distance in inches from the top of the piston to the top of the cylinder block when the piston is at TDC. The top of the cylinder is the deck, or surface to which the head bolts.  If the outer edge of the piston travels above the deck, this is called negative deck height and you must enter a negative (-) number. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.2 Calc Max Lobe Lift 
Is the maximum lobe or tappet lift for the cam. Max Lobe Lift is defined on page 46 in the Engine specs.  See page 51 for general notes on Calculation Menus and for an example of their use.  
Advertised Valve Lift, in 
The valve lift you see in the cam grinder’s ads,  catalog or cam card in inches, also called Gross Valve Lift. 
Assumed Rocker Arm Ratio 
The Rocker Arm Ratio assumed by the cam grinder for the particular engine.  This should be stated somewhere in the catalog or on the card.  Note that this assumed rocker arm ratio may be different than what you are actually using on the engine.  The Notes section displays typical Assumed Rocker Arm Ratios for popular American V-8s. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.9 New Test Menu: 
The New Test command is available by clicking on File at the top, left of the Main Screen, then selecting New Test.  You will then be presented with the screen shown in Figure 2.28.  Getting a new test started right is probably the most important step in running a flow test. (Also see Example 4.1 and 4.2 for more details on the New Test menu.) 
Figure 2.28 New Test Menu
When starting a New Test, it is usually best to first Open a previous test which is similar to the New Test you will be running (similar head specs, similar test lifts, similar data to record, etc.) This previous test will then be the 'pattern' or 'template' for the New Test and will save you from having to type in many specs to describe this New Test.  This also ensures consistency between your tests and reduces the possibility of errors. 
If the current test is not a good 'pattern' for this new test (or if there currently is no test displayed), you can abort starting this new test by clicking on 'Cancel (don't start new test)' at the top of the New Test screen. Then click on 'File' at the top, left of the Main Screen and select one of the 'Open' options to open a past test to serve as a pattern. 
If you must start with a blank test (which may be the case 
want to keep these specs for the new test.  Once the new test is started
when you first get this 
you can then make modifications to these specs if you want.
program), or want to modify some specs from the previous test, click on the 'See Specs' buttons for each category of specs.  Click on Help at these menus for more info on how to enter these specs. 
Figure 2.29 Test Pattern Data 
When you close out these menus, you are brought back to the New Test screen.  Be sure to check the check box at the left for all specs you want to use for your new test.  All Categories not checked will be blanked out.  Blank specs may cause problems with more detailed analysis, and won't allow you to keep track of important details about the head you are testing. 
Most specs in these categories can be changed once the test has started with no problems.  This includes specs which simply describe the test and head and do not affect any calculations or what is recorded, like Head Details, Test Comments, etc. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
However, specs which DO affect calculations like the Flow Bench Specs, most Test Options specs, Valve Diameters in Head Specs (if L/Ds are being used) are critical to have correct for even the first data point. 
Four other critical specs are listed separately at the top: 
1. 
File Name for New Test is the file name the program will create for saving the Flow Data for the new test you are starting. The program fills in a default name of the current test name, but incrementing the last digit in the name by 1.  You can change this name to most anything you like.  The program will warn you if the name entered is not valid and show you what is wrong. 

2. 
Operator for New Test is the name of the operator for this test.  Click on Pick to pick an operator name already used or to enter a new name.  The program defaults to the operator of the current test. 

3. 
Head # for New Test is critical for shops who use a head numbering system.  Click on Assign to create a new Head # based on the last Head # assigned (incremented up by 1) or to start with a new type of Head #. 

4. 
Folder Name for New Test is the folder in the PFADAT folder where the test will be saved.  The program may not be using the name 'folder' for this spec, but whatever word you have assigned in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen.  The folder name 'Examples' is reserved for Performance Trends example tests supplied with the program, and can NOT be used for your tests. 


When you are ready to start the new test, click on 'Start New Test' at the top of the screen.  If some critical specs has not been entered, the program will warn you and ask you for it at that time.  The program will fill in the Test Time and Date based on the computer's time and date.  This can be changed later by clicking on the Test Time/Date at the Main Screen. 
Tip:  If you are making several small changes to a port, and are not starting with a new head, you might want to simply call every new port modification a new 'Cylinder'.  This is done by increasing the 'Number of Cylinders to Test' in the Head Specs menu to as high as 8 if needed.   
You can keep track of modifications in the Test Comments, like "Cyl 1 = Baseline, Cyl 2 = 3 angle valve job".  This will save considerable time not having to start new tests, and avoids filling the test library with possibly meaningless tests. 
However, there are limitations with this method in that you are limited in how you can report, graph or analyze a single cylinder's data. 
For modifications which you want to treat seperately, you can either: 
• Use the Port Edit command (Pro version only) as discussed on page 21 to copy the port to the first position (for example, Cylinder #1).  Then change the ‘Number of Cylinders to Test’ in the Head Specs to 
1. This effectively erases all other ports.  Then save this single port to a new name. 
• Or, perform a completely separate flow test. 
See Appendix 7 for using the new, easy “EZ Start Wizard” feature added in version 3.5. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.10 Test Correction Factor Menu 
This screen lets you calculate a test correction for a SF 110 style of flow bench.  The Test Correction can be entered 2 different ways (chosen by 'Data Type').  
1. 
You can enter a number directly, like '1.002'.  The number 1.000 will give No correction (uses the Factory calibration). 

2. 
You can install the standard orifice provided with your bench (where the head normally goes) and flow it.  Then knowing what the orifice is rated for (usually 153.2 CFM at 10") and what it actually flowed, the program will calculate a new Test Correction. 


The procedure for option 2 would be: 
1. 
Open some recent test that you ran on this flow bench, from the Test Library, or start a New Test (as in Example 4.2).  This test will be used as a scratch pad to calculate Corr CFM. 

2. 
Install the Std Orifice plate with the 2 holes, one small and one large. 

3. 
Plug the large orifice and check that you are getting from 35 to 55 % Flow reading on the Range 1 (from 3.5 to 5.5 CFM flow on SF110/120) assuming 0 leakage. 

4. 
Open both the Std Orifices and flow them at 10" Test Pressure.  Record all the data to calculate CFM, including Range (usually the highest range), Test Pres, Flow Pres, Test Temp and Flow Temp.  Valve Lift is not required.  You can do this manually or with the FlowCom and record the data in some blank row in the Flow Data grid.  Note the Corr CFM obtained.  

5. 
Click on the Test Corr display at the Main Screen and bring up the Test Correction menu (Figure 2.30).  

6. 
Choose Calculate from CFM Flow as the Data Type.  Then enter the Corr CFM recorded and the Std Orifice Flow (usually 153.2 CFM). The program will display the new Test Corr.  (Note that the New Test Corr is based on the fact that the Measured CFM had the Current Test Corr factored into it.  Meas Flow WO Test Corr is displayed also so you can more easily see how the Test Corr is calculated.) 

7. 
If the New Test Corr is close to the Current Test Corr (within 1% or .01), it is recommended you do not use the new one, but keep the old one. 



See Example 4.2 for more details. 
See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 


2.11 Recording Data Electronically with SuperFlow FlowCom (tm) or Performance Trends Black Box II: 
This screen shows you the readings from the electronic recording device currently connected to your computer, either the SuperFlow FlowCom (tm) or Performance Trends Black Box II .  Either of these systems let you automatically record these readings and load them in the Test Data grid.  This feature saves considerable time, ensures consistency of readings and improves accuracy.  (Also see Example 4.2 for more details.) 
Figure 2.31 Screen for Reading Electronics, SF FlowCom or Perf. Trends Black Box II 

What data is displayed here and can be recorded is determined by settings in the Flow Bench and Test Options screens, and somewhat by available space on the screen.  Click on 'Flow Bench' and 'Test Options' at the top of the Main Screen to see these options.  
To avoid communications problems with the electronics, you can't type on the Test Data grid when this screen is open.  Therefore, you must use commands on this screen to select or change 'Data Points' (which row in the Test Data grid you are recording for), Range, and Valve Lift.  Also, you can only close this screen by clicking on 'Close' at the top left corner. 
FlowCom is a computer itself, and can calculate and display CFM based on pressures, temperatures, leakage, range, etc.  The Port Flow Analyzer reads the pressures, temperatures, barometer (and optional swirl or tumble inputs), but not the FlowCom’s calculated CFM. The Port Flow Analyzer program calculates its own CFM based on these raw measurements.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
If the Port Flow Analyzer's Leakage, Set (desired) Test Pressure, Flow Range and Flow Direction match the FlowCom's, both will calculate and display the same CFM.  If they are NOT the same, but the Port Flow Analyzer's Leakage, Set Test Pressure, Flow Range and Flow Direction are correct, the CFM calculated by the Port Flow Analyzer is correct. (A note is displayed at the bottom of the FlowCom screen if these specs don't match.) 
This is important because it means you do not have to keep adjusting the FlowCom's leakage, range or test pressure to match the flow bench.  Just be sure the Port Flow Analyzer screen does match the settings on the flow bench and the Port Flow Analyzer's CFM readings will be correct. 
Note: Check the Preference spec SF Cal. Test Pres. Corr. on page 27 for a setting which may produce an additional small difference between the Port Flow Analyzer’s calculated CFM and the FlowCom’s. 
The Performance Trends Black Box II does not calculate CFM.  Therefore, there are no concerns about the leakage, flow range values, etc matching the Port Flow Analyzer program because the Black Box II does not store any of these values. 
The most critical thing for accurate readings is to check that the manometers and dial thermometers on your flow bench are matching the readings on this screen.  If they do not, the electronics may need recalibration.  See Appendix 5. 
When taking a reading, the Port Flow Analyzer takes several readings to average together to produce a good, repeatable reading. This is shown in the upper left corner as the 'Set Test Pres' frame changes to 'Reading' x of xx and is displayed in blue.  At the same time, it watches the stability of Test Pressure (vertical manometer) and Swirl or Tumble if they are being recorded.  The number of readings to average is set in the Flow Bench Specs, from 5 to 50. 
When done taking a reading, the data is written to the Test Data grid on the Main Screen and the Test Summary graph is updated.  The 'Data Point' indicator and corresponding highlighted bar for the current Row automatically advance by 1.  Therefore, try to start recording data at the top of the Test Data grid (Data Point 1) and let the Data Point indicator and current row advance automatically down the grid as you record data. 
If you have selected to record Port Velocity (selected in the Test Options) screen, a 'Port Velocity' option is available at the top of the screen.  Here you can select to Start or Stop recording Port Velocities. 
You can click on the blue bar at the top of this screen and drag this screen to any location on your computer screen and the program will keep it there. 
Menu Commands Close 
Click this option to close this menu and return to the Main Screen. 
Record (F1) 
Click this option or press the <F1> key to start recording data. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Port Velocity 
Click this option to select either to start recording Port Velocity (somewhat rearranges this screen) or to stop recording Port Velocity (returns the screen to recording CFM).  This is only displayed when you have requested Port Velocities to be recorded in the Test Options menu. 
Options 
Freeze 
Freezes the current readings in this screen. 
Continuous Update 
“Un-freezes” the current readings in this screen and returns to continuous updating. 
Re-Zero Pressure Readings 
Electronics are prone to minor changes (or drift) over time or through temperature changes, etc.  This is most obvious when you have the flow bench turned off, but the updating pressure readings are not reading exactly 0.0. Rather than doing a complete calibration of the system, you can simply re-zero the Performance Trends Electronic Interface by clicking on this option.  The program will tell you to turn Off the flow bench and wait for all pressures (manometers) to go to zero.  Then click a button and the program will reset the zero pressure reading on all 3 pressure sensors. (This command is not available with the SuperFlow FlowCom.) 
Note: Because the pressure transducers are so sensitive, the updating display will never read a constant 0 when the flow bench is turned off. However, when they are correctly zeroed, you should see about the same amount of negative readings as positive readings.  (Note:  The SuperFlow FlowCom is designed to never read negative #s, so this does not apply to it.) 
Eliminate Re-Zero Correction 
Click on this option if you want to eliminate any Re-Zeroing effect.  The program will now convert voltage from the Performance Trends Electronic Interface exactly as you calibrated it.  (This command is not available with the SuperFlow FlowCom.) 
Display ... 
These “Display” commands are of little value to the user.  There are used primarily by Performance Trends technicians to troubleshoot communications problems. 
Help 
Brings up “on screen” help. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Definition of Data Types Recorded 
Set Test Pres is the desired reading on the vertical manometer, the pressure drop across the valve and port.  This is set in the Test Options menu.  When recording data, this changes to 'Reading' x of xx and is displayed in blue. 
Act. Test Pres is the electronics’ current reading of the vertical manometer, the pressure drop across the valve and port. 
Range  is the Flow Bench range #.  Click on the down arrow key to select from the current valid ranges for this flow bench (set in the Flow Bench menu).  For SuperFlow 1020 benches, this is displayed as the full CFM for the current range. 
Data Point is the current row in the Test Data grid you are working with.  This row will be highlighted in blue.  Click on the down arrow key to select the row to work with.  The total number of rows is set in the Test Options menu. 
Valve Lift is the current Valve Lift for the row you are working with.  Type in a different valve lift to change it. 
Flow Reading is the electronic’s current reading of the inclined manometer, the pressure drop across the flow measurement orifices in the flow bench. 
Test Temp (T1) is the air temperature by the head, the lower temperature location on SuperFlow 110 or 120 benches. 
Flow Temp (T2) is the air temperature by the flow measurement orifices, the upper temperature location on SuperFlow 110 or 120 benches. 
Barometer is the actual barometric pressure in Inches of Mercury and is available only with the FlowCom. The “corrected” barometric pressure, as reported by radio or TV weather reports, will be higher due to elevation. 
Corr. CFM Flow is the CFM calculated by the Port Flow Analyzer based on all its current settings.  This should match the FlowCom's CFM if all FlowCom and Port Flow Analyzer settings match. 
Port Velocity for a FlowCom is the reading from the 3rd FlowCom pressure input, usually hooked to a Pitot tube for measuring Port Velocity.  The reading can be in Feet/Second or inches of water pressure depending on the 'Port Velocity Data' setting in the Test Options menu.  For the Performance Trends Electronic Interface, you must select inches of water pressure for the 'Port Velocity Data' setting in the Test Options menu. 
Swirl for a FlowCom is the reading from the J1 connection on the FlowCom, usually connected to a Swirl Meter or Tumble Meter. This is only displayed if the 'Swirl' setting in the Test Options menu is set to one of the Record Swirl settings.  For the Performance Trends Electronic Interface, this is the signal entering the Auxiliary 0-5 volt jack, if so equipped.  
Tumble for a Flow is the reading from the J1 connection on the FlowCom, usually connected to a Swirl Meter or Tumble Meter. This is only displayed if the 'Tumble' setting in the Test Options menu is set to one of the Record Tumble settings. For the Performance Trends Electronic Interface, this is the signal entering the Auxiliary 0-5 volt jack, if so equipped.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Chapter 3 Output 
The Port Flow Analyzer provides several ways to view and output the test results, including: 
• 
Reports of tabular data displayed on the screen 

• 
ASCII files for importing results to other software packages (Pro version only) 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output of reports or graphs 

• 
History Log (Pro version only) 

• 
Data Libraries for recording flow test data (or sets of head or engine specs in the Pro version) for later use. 


All these topics will be covered in this chapter. Figure 3.1 shows how to reach all these various features. 
See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 
Figure 3.1 Various Output Options from the Test Results Screen  
Click on File to display several options to Save test files, Open test files which were previously saved, display the History Log, or print information. 
Click on Graph to display several Graph Options and produce a high resolution graph. 
Click on Report to display several Report Options and produce a tabular report.  Once a report is displayed, it can be output as an ASCII file, or printed. Open from Pro version’s
Name of current Test File History Log displays a chronological log of test files you have recently worked with (started new, opened, made graphs or reports of, etc.) Section 3.8. 

Saving options to Save a test file are discussed in Section 3.6. 
Opening options to open a previously saved test file are discussed in Section 3.6. 
Although Print options are limited on the Main Screen, most menus have a Print button to print that menu, or a File command which lists Print options under it. See Section 35 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



3.1 Reports 
Click on the Report menu command at the Main Screen to be presented with the Report Options Menu shown in Figure 3.2.  The inputs in this menu are described below. 
Type 
Several types of reports can be picked by clicking on the down arrow key of this combo box.  Depending on your choice, several options in this menu may be enabled or disabled. 
Correct to New Test Pressure 
Pick Yes and the report data will be corrected to the test pressures identified by the next one or two specs, New Int Test Pres, '' Water and 
under Test Pressure. (Note that in the Pro version, the Port Velocities, Swirl and Tumble are corrected in addition to CFM.  However, these corrections have not been well proven with years of experience as has the CFM correction.) 
For several Report Types, like Engine Performance report, no correction is possible or required and this spec is disabled (printed in gray and you are not allowed to change it).  
New Int Test Pres, '' Water 
The pressure the intake flow or velocity data is corrected to if the previous spec, Correct to New Test Pressure is set to Yes.  Note that if you flow a head at 10” and correct to say 28” you may get different results than if you had actually flowed the head at 28”.  This can be especially true of data other than CFM, like Swirl, Tumble, Stability, and Port Velocity readings. 
New Exh Test Pres, '' Water 
The pressure the exhaust flow or velocity data is corrected to if the previous spec, Correct to New Test Pressure is set to Yes. Note that if you flow a head at 10” and correct to say 28” you may get different results than if you had actually flowed the head at 28”.  This can be especially true of data other than CFM, like Swirl, Tumble, Stability, and Port Velocity readings. 
Which Cylinder(s) 
Click on the down arrow key of this combo box. to pick from reporting on: 
• 
All Cylinders tested 

• 
Average of all cylinders tested 

• 
Pick Individual Cylinders (new feature added in version 3.5.  See Appendix 7) 

• 
Individual cylinders, which can be picked by the order they were recorded. 


If the test file was only for 1 cylinder, or for some reports which require average data like Engine Performance Estimate, this spec will be disabled. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Notes: 
• 
If you pick Average, the average is based on all cylinders with data which is not 0.  For example, for 3 cylinders, if cylinder 1 is 20 CFM and cylinder 2 is 24 CFM and cylinder 3 is 0 CFM, the average is 22 CFM ((20+24)/2),  not 14.7 CFM ((20+24+0)/3). 

• 
If the cylinders are numbered 2, 4, 6 and 8 on the head, and you ask for the 4th cylinder, the report will be for cylinder #8, not cylinder #4. 


Report Types 
Int & Exh Raw Flow Data 
This report simply restates the raw data recorded on the Flow Test  Data grid for each and every port.  See Figure 3.3. If you select this report all specs in the Reports menu are disabled. 
Generally, raw data is only useful for finding errors in data which occurred during the flow test.  For example, during analysis of data, one data point looks "out of line" from the others.  By examining the raw data, you may discover that a Test Temp of 15 was entered when it should have been 115.   
You can now go into the Flow Test Data grid screen and change that particular point to 115.  Use the Save command to save this corrected data to the Flow Test Library .  This ensures that if you open the file again, it will have the correct 115 value, not 15.  Now when you make reports or graphs, the Port Flow Analyzer will calculate all results based on the new, correct 115 Test Temp. 
See Section 2.1 describing the Main Screen Test Data grid for definitions of the items reported here. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Int & Exh Cyl-Cyl Comparisn 
This report type compares the average CFM for each port on the head you tested with the average for the entire head.  If the same lift point is tested more than once on an individual cylinder, say 2 times, an *2 will be include with the CFM for that cylinder.  See Figure 3.4.  (See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for several new features added in version 3.5,3.5B, 3.5C.) 

Int & Exh Calculated Data 
This report contains very little data from the Flow Test Data grid.  However, it does contain several calculated parameters which will help to rate ports for their design and porting. 
Port 
This column identifies the port type (Int or Exh) and the cylinder # for each data point.   
If the report is for an Average of all cylinders across the head, the number listed with “Int” or “Exh” is the number of points averaged together on this head. Only ports with identical lift values are averaged together.  For example, if all four intake ports have a lift value of .400", the identifier would be “Int (4)”.  If only one intake port has a lift value of .403", it would be identified as “Int (1)”. 
Note: During averaging, the program will warn that a port has a very low but not exactly 0.0 Corr CFM flow with a lift which is greater than 0, or 0 lift and has significantly different than zero Corr CFM. To continue with averaging at this point, would cause unusual data to be averaged in with the other cylinder's flow, giving unexpected average data.  It is best to do a report or graph of all cylinder's data before a report of Average data to check for this.  (If a port has exactly 0.0 CFM or is blank, the program assumes the port has not yet been tested and the data is not averaged with other data.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Lift 
Valve Lift in inches. 
L/D 
The ratio of valve lift divided by valve diameter. 
Corr CFM 
Air flow in CFM corrected to the test pressure specified.  If the spec Corrected to New Test Pres in the Report Options menu is set to No,  flow is corrected to the Intake or Exhaust Test Pressure set in the Test Option menu.  If the spec Corrected to New Test Pres is set to Yes, flow is corrected to the specs New Int Test Pressure and New Exh Test Pressure in the Report Options menu. 
Vlv Area 
This is the geometric valve opening area in square inches.  There are 2 ways to calculate geometric valve area: 
1. 
Simple method using the outside diameter of the valve and valve lift,  sometimes called the “curtain area". This is the method usually used for port flow analysis because it only requires valve diameter and lift to be calculated.  It is also used in the our Engine Analyzer programs and the Basic version of Port Flow Analyzer. 

2. 
A more accurate way is to use the valve seat angle, valve stem diameter and inside throat diameter to calculate area. This area is smaller than the simple "curtain area".  See Figures 3.6, 3.7 and 3.8. 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



In the Pro version, you can select the method used to calculate Valve Area.  This is selectable in the Preferences menu (Section 
2.2) by the spec “Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area”, either Yes or No.  Since Valve Area is also used to calculate other outputs like Valve Velocity, CFM/sq in and Flow Coef, this setting also affects these outputs. 
CFM/sq in 
Is the Corr CFM divided by the Vlv Area.  This can give an idea of how efficiently the port is flowing for a valve of this size at this lift.  However, if a port is flowing 50 CFM/sq in at 10” test pressure, it will flow 84 CFM/sq in at 28”.  See Flow Coef below for a measure of flow efficiency which does not depend on test pressure.  With the Pro version, also see Vlv Area to understand the options for calculating Vlv Area, which will affect CFM/sq in. 
FlwArea 
This is the opening area of the valve in square inches “as far as the air is concerned”.  For example, the geometric valve opening area (Vlv Area) may be 2.5 square inches but due to poor design, the air restriction is more like a hole (FlwArea) of 1.5 square inches. 
This is really what you are measuring with a flow test.  CFM only has meaning when you know what Test Pressure was used.  A head that flows 100 CFM at 10" flows 167 CFM at 28".  However, the Port Flow Analyzer reports the FlwArea of 1.15 sq in for either 10" or 28" of test pressure. 
The difference between Vlv Area and FlwArea is a useful measure of how well a port is flowing for its size. Note that at low lifts, it is possible for the FlwArea to actually be larger than Vlv Area.  This is especially true if you have set Use Throat Dia to Calc Vlv Area to Yes in the Preferences Menu.  That is because that method calculates a smaller Vlv Area for the same valve lift. 
Flow Coef 
The flow coefficient is simply the ratio of FlwArea to Vlv Area.  For very well designed ports it will be close to 1.0 or higher at low lifts and 0.7 to 0.8 at high lifts, especially if you set Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area to Yes in the Preferences Menu.  
The advantage of using Flow Coef is that it does not change significantly with different test pressures.  A well designed valve/port will have a flow coefficient of .8 for any valve size or pressure drop.  Flow Coefs over 0.8 are highly unlikely at high valve lift. Good valve designs will have Flow Coefs of .6 to .8 at max lift. 
Generally, there are higher flow coefficients at low valve lifts because here the valve and seat are the only major restrictions.  In addition, the valve and valve seat with a multi-angle valve job closely resembles a free-flowing venturi shape.  At higher lifts and air flows, the valve seat and the entire port combine their restrictions, and the Flow Coef drops. 
Flow Coef calculated with accurate port dimensions for Throat Area and Seat Angle is the best number to rate the design of a port.  You must also set Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area to Yes in  the Preferences menu.  The best you can hope to achieve for either case is listed in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1 Valve Lift  Best Flow Coef with Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area = Yes  Best Flow Coef with Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area = No  
Low Lift (L/D less than .15)  1.20  1.00  
Mid Lift (L/D from .15 to .25)  .95  .80  
High Lift (L/D over .25)  1.00  .90  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Valve Vel 
The valve velocity is the average air speed flowing through the valve opening in feet/sec.  Like CFM, the Valve Vel will increase with increasing test pressure. Therefore, only compare Valve Vel between heads with equal corrected test pressures. 
Valve Vel can be used to compare valve air flow with port air flow.  Generally, port design is most critical where air velocity is high.  Thus, at low lift where Valve Vel is high compared to Port Vel, valve and valve seat design is critical.  Valve Vel can also be used to compare Pitot Tube air velocity measurements.  See Port Vel. 
Port Vel 
The port velocity is the average air speed flowing through a port area defined by the Avg Port Diameter (or Avg Port Height and Width) entered in the Head Specs menu.  The units are measured in feet/sec.  Like Valve Vel, the Port Vel will change with different corrected test pressures. See Valve Vel. 
The Port Vel can be used to compare the inertia tuning potential of different port designs.  Air at high velocity contains significant inertia; the higher the velocity, the higher the inertia.  This inertia can be used to pack more air into the cylinder after the piston has passed BDC but before the intake valve has closed.  The same principle applies for scavenging on the exhaust side. 
If two ports flow the same CFM for the same test pressure, the one with the higher Port Vel will generally produce more torque (with proper length of runner for tuning).  HP potential will depend on cam specs and the designed RPM range of the engine. 
Swirl 
The swirl reading you entered, usually in RPM.  Performance Trends’ convention is a negative swirl means the swirl direction is counter-clockwise when viewed from the top of the bore. This column is only displayed if you selected to record swirl in the Test Options menu. 
Important: Swirl is corrected for any difference in test pressure when swirl was recorded and the test pressure for the report, the same as CFM.  Although this correction is approximately correct, its accuracy has not yet been proven over years of experience, like the CFM correction. 
Tumble 
The tumble reading you entered, usually in RPM.  Performance Trends’ convention is a negative tumble means the tumble direction is opposite of the direction the intake port would induce.  See Figure 3.9. This column is only displayed if you selected to record tumble in the Test Options menu. 
Figure 3.9 Tumble Direction 

   Intake Port 
Important: Tumble is corrected for any difference in test pressure when swirl was recorded and the test pressure for the report, the same as CFM.  Although this correction is approximately correct, its accuracy has not yet been proven over years of experience, like the CFM correction. . 

+ Positive       Tumble       Direction 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
% Exh/Int 
This is the percent ratio of the exhaust flow to the intake flow at equal Inches lift or L/D depending on the Valve Lift Settings (Inches or L/D) in the Test Options menu.  For example: 
           Inches are being used for Valve Lift Settings 
Int #3 = 121 CrCFM @ .2 inches Exh #3 = 88 CrCFM @ .2 inches            Exh #3 % Exh/Int = 72.7 @ .2 inches 
"Rules of thumb" state the exhaust should flow 75% of the intake flow for “non boosted” engines.  For supercharged and nitrous oxide engines, the desired percent increases to 85%..  The % Exh/Int Flow Area in the Eng Performance Estimate report gives a better indication of this relationship because it also takes the cam profile into account. 
Int & Exh Other Calc Data (Pro version only) 
This report contains Lift, L/D and Corr CFM, and information recorded only with the Pro version and not found in other reports. This data includes stability, swirl and swirl stability, and tumble and tumble stability.   
Definitions for this data are found in the previous section describing the Int & Exh Calculated Data report, and the definitions for test Stability, swirl stability and tumble stability described in Section 2.1.  Note that test Stability, swirl stability and tumble stability are not affected by any correction factor for test pressure.  If test stability was 1.5% at 10” it is assumed to be 1.5% at 28”. This may not be the case in some situations.  Many head porters say a port which is stable at 10” can be very unstable at 28”. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Eng. Performance Estimate (Pro version only) 
This report will display several calculated parameters describing how the current head's flow data would perform with a given engine.  They are based on the flow data for the current Flow Test file and specifications in the current Engine Specs file. 

Performance Potential At Est Tq Peak: 5300 RPM 
The program estimates performance at 2 RPMs, the estimated torque and HP peak RPMs.  For example, in the line above, the program estimates the torque peak to occur at 5300 RPM. 
The performance calculations are similar to our standard version Engine Analyzer program.  However, since there are so few inputs about the engine, the program must make many assumptions.  In general, these assumptions assume race engine conditions, like race intake manifold, headers, low friction from accessories, no nitrous oxide, no supercharger, etc.  Therefore, performance estimates will be "best case" for non-supercharged gas engines.  Your actual performance will likely be less, especially for more street orientated combinations. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Torque, Ft Lbs Horsepower 
The brake torque and HP at the flywheel for these RPMs, corrected to 29.92 and 60 degrees of dry air. 
Safety Precaution:  Even though the engine may be able to flow air and make HP at high  RPM, its connecting rods, crank pins, pistons, etc may not be able to withstand the severe stress.  The RPMs estimated for the torque and HP peak are based mainly on air flow capabilities only, not stress limits or the possibility of parts breakage.  You must judge this limit based on your experience, parts manufacturer's advise and other sources. 
Air Flow CFM 
The estimated air flow through the engine for this RPM in standard CFM. 
Volumetric Eff, % 
The estimated volumetric efficiency for this RPM.  Volumetric Efficiency is basically the percent of air which the engine flows compared to how much it could under “perfect”, non-supercharged conditions.  Naturally aspirated engines with good tuning will achieve volumetric efficiencies well in excess of 100%.  See Table 3.2 for typical values. 
Table 3.2 Typical Values for Volumetric Efficiency, %  
Engine Description  Volumetric Eff, %  
Non-performance American design of the 70s  50-70  
Modern production, American and foreign  70-85  
"Muscle Car" era performance design, production  75-85  
Full race design, naturally aspirated  100-130  

Fuel Flow, lb/hr 
Fuel Flow assuming gasoline in lb/hr.  Multiply this value by .171 to obtain gallons per hour. 
Piston Speed, Ft/Min 
This is the calculated piston speed in feet per minute at this RPM.  Piston speed is used as a comparison of engine speed between engine's with different displacements.  See Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3 Piston Speeds for Various Types of Engines  
Engine Type  Piston Speed, ft/min at Max HP  
Basic Street Automobile  2500-3000  
Performance  3000-4000  
Race  3500-6000  

Engines of different displacements with equal quality and strength reciprocating parts can generally safely rev to the same pistons speed, which may be very different RPMs.  For example, for a small, short stroke engine, 3000 ft/min piston speed may come at 7000 RPM.  But on a large V-8 with a long stroke, 3000 ft/min may come at 5000 RPM.  With equal quality and strength parts, the small engine would not be stressing its rods, pistons, etc at 7000 RPM any more than the larger V-8 at 5000 RPM. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Runners Used to Est Perf (may not be optimum, 1 int & 1 exh rnnr/cyl): 
This section tells you the program's assumptions for typical runners for an engine with these heads and general engine specs.  Depending on the RPM you want to tune for, better performance may be obtained with different runner sizes. 
If you set # Valves/Cyl to 2 or 3 in the Head Specs Port Layout spec, there are 2 or 3 of these runners per cylinder.  If you want to see the size of 1 runner which would feed the 2 valves or 3 valves and give approximately the same performance, multiply the area by 2 and the diameter by 1.414 for 2 valves, and 3 and 1.73 for 3 valves.  The length will not change. 
Intake Runner Length, in 
Is the length of the intake runner from the valve seat to the first abrupt opening or enlargement.  This abrupt opening could be a plenum or an opening to atmosphere.  This is always assumed to be 10" in the Port Flow Analyzer. 
Intake Runner Avg Area,sqin 
Is the average cross sectional area of the intake runner over its entire length in square inches.   
This area is taken from the Intake Port Spec Avg Port Dia (or Width and Height) in the Head Specs menu.  By changing this spec, you will likely see a significant effect on the engine performance estimate. 
Intake Runner Avg Dia, in 
Is the average diameter of the intake runner over its entire length in inches.  See Intake Runner Avg Area,sq in above. 
Exh Header Pri Len, in 
Is the length of the exhaust runner from the valve seat to the first abrupt opening or enlargement.  The program assumes headers are used and this is the length from the valve seat to the collector.  The program estimates length based on the anticipated RPM range of the engine to give good tuning. 
Exh Header O.D., in 
Is the outside diameter of the header tubes to the nearest 1/8 inch for 18 gauge tubing (approximately .050" wall).  The program estimates O.D. based on the anticipated RPM range of the engine to give good tuning.  The I.D. will be approximately .100” smaller than this O.D. 
Intake Port Volume in CCs (for 1 port, 4.5 inches long): 
This section tells you the program's assumption for the port volume used to estimate performance, and suggests a port volume for good velocity and tuning.  Both volumes are in CCs or cubic centimeters. 
For these volumes to be accurate, it is critical that the Port Length spec in the Head Specs menu be correct.  This length is reported here in the example line above as 4.5". 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
If you set # Valves/Cyl to 2 or 3 in the Head Specs’ Port Layout spec, there are 2 or 3 of these ports per cylinder and the volumes are for each of these ports.  If you want to see the size of 1 port which would feed the 2  or 3 valves and give approximately the same performance, multiply the volumes by 2 or 3. 
Vol Used to Est Perf 
Is the volume in CCs calculated from the Head specs of Avg Port Length and Avg Port Dia, in. 
Suggested Port Volume 
Is the volume in CCs the program would recommend for good tuning at the estimated HP peak, also assuming a 10" runner length.  If the actual engine would peak higher or your would use a longer intake runner, this volume would increase somewhat. For a lower RPM or shorter runner this volume would decrease. 
This recommendation is very general, and much is assumed about other engine specifications. 
Calculated Results: 
Int Valve Lift, in Exh Valve Lift, in 
Int Duration @ .050'' Exh Duration @ .050'' 

Int Lobe Center Exh Lobe Center 
The calculations are simply restating the Calculated Specs from the Engine Specs menu, discussed in Section 2.7. 
Int Lobe Area, Deg*In Exh Lobe Area, Deg*In 
Is the estimated area of the cam lift profile measured in tappet lift x cam degrees.  See Figure 3.12.   
This measurement is usually obtained with computerized cam checkers or when a cam is measured with Performance Trends’ Cam Analyzer.  This spec lets you see how closely the Port Flow Analyzer's cam profile matches a measured cam profile.  See Figure 3.12.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Int Flow Area, Deg*SqIn Exh Flow Area, Deg*SqIn 
Is the valve opening flow area in units of degree-square inches.  These units can be illustrated using the example below.   
Example: If the Int Flow Area was 200, it could mean that: 
• 
An effective valve flow area of 2 square inches was open for 100 degree of crank rotation.  This would be a great flowing head with a very short duration cam. 

• 
An effective valve flow area of 1 square inches was open for 200 degree of crank rotation.  This would be a typical head with a typical cam.    

• 
An effective valve flow area of .5 square inches was open for 400 degree of crank rotation.  This would be a bad flowing head with a very long duration cam. 

• 
Or any other combination of Flow Area at a particular valve lift x the # degrees at that valve which gives 200. 


This value represents the total effective flow area available for the intake and exhaust valves while they are open. It is calculated from the estimated valve lift curve and the measured valve flow curve.  See Figure 3.13. 
The Flow Area is the most useful measurement for comparing port & cam combinations for air flow capability. Generally: the higher the flow area, the higher the HP capability. 
Lobe Separation Lifter Type 
Again, these "calculations" are simply restating specs from the Engine Specs menu, discussed in Section 2.7. 
Ovlp Flow Area, DegSqIn 
Is the same as the Int Flow Area and Exh Flow Area explained earlier, except it is calculating the size hole available for the exhaust to leak into the intake runner.  Cams with high overlap and heads with good low-lift flow increase this number. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

For race engines, overlap is generally needed for two reasons.  First, it provides lower cam acceleration rates to attain the high lifts required for high RPM HP.  Second, overlap can also improve performance by allowing for efficient purging of residual exhaust out of the clearance volume during overlap with proper intake and exhaust tuning.   
However, at "untuned" RPMs, overlap can increase the potential for 
Figure 3.14 Overlap Flow Area
intake reversion (reverse air flow up the intake runner from the cylinder) and poor scavenging.  High overlap area can also lead to poor fuel economy through "short circuiting" (where intake charge passes through the combustion chamber out the exhaust system without being used).   
Since turbocharged engines operate with high pressure and high temperature exhaust, Ovlp Flow Area is best kept to a minimum for turbocharged engines.  This is both to reduce reversion (when high pressure exhaust flows backward into the intake) and exhaust temperatures (when "short circuited" fresh charge burns in the exhaust).  Generally, cams for supercharged engines are also ground with less Ovlp Flow Area, for similar reasons as turbo cams. 
The Ovlp Flow Area is given here to compare overlap areas between different cam profiles, lash settings, and cylinder head flow curves. 
Ovlp Lobe Area, Deg*In 
Is similar to the Int or Exh Lobe Area, but is just measured during the overlap period.  It is similar to the Ovlp Flow Area shown in Figure 3.14, but the graph would be of the cam profile instead of Flow Area. 
Est Cranking Comp. PSI 
Is the estimated cranking compression pressure in pounds per square inch based on compression ratio, estimated intake cam profile and lash.  The calculation assumes some heat losses and cylinder leakage.  Your actual cranking compression (100-200 RPM) will likely be less due primarily to leakage and heat losses.  Higher RPM compression (1000 RPM or higher) would more closely match this value.  Est Cranking Comp is reported here simply to show trends. 
Est Idle Vacuum, ''Hg 
Is the estimated idle vacuum at 1500 RPM, with no load on the engine (no torque converter).  The program assumes a constant barometric pressure of 29.92, a low amount of accessory loads, good spark advance and good fuel distribution and mixing.  Actual engines will likely develop less vacuum, especially if over-carbureted for example.  Use this calculation only for predicting trends between different combinations. 
% Exh/Int Flow Area  
This is the percentage ratio of total exhaust flow area to intake flow area.  It is calculated as: 
Exh Flow Area, Deg*SqIn 
  % Exh/Int Flow Area  = 
Int Flow Area, Deg*SqIn 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
"Rules of thumb" state that the exhaust port does not produce significant power losses until the exhaust flow potential falls below 75% of the intake flow potential.  For supercharged or nitrous oxide engines this percent should increase to approximately 85%.  This number is a more accurate determination of %Exh/Int than the %Exh/Int calculated in the Int & Exh Calc Data report discussed several pages earlier in this section. 
Engine Disp., cu in 
Is the engine size (total swept volume) in cubic inches. 
Engine Disp., liters 
Is the engine size (total swept volume) in liters.  To obtain displacement in CCs, multiply this displacement in liters by 1000.  For example a 1.23 liter engine is 1230 CCs. 
Compression Ratio 
Again, this "calculation" simply restates this spec from the Engine Specs menu, discussed in Section 2.7. 
Clearance Volume, CCs 
Is the total clearance volume (chamber volume in head, gasket volume, piston dome or dish, etc) for this engine displacement, # of Cylinders and Compression Ratio. 
Meas Int & Exh VelData (Pro version only) 
This report displays all the port velocity readings (measured with a Pitot tube in the port) with averages.  See Figure 3.15. 
These readings are corrected for any difference between the test pressure during the test and the requested test pressure for the report. However, the variation if port velocity across a port is likely to be different, say if you measure at 10” and correct to 28” than if you actually measured port velocities at 28”. 
The lifts you record port velocity at is determined by settings in the Test Options menu. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

Compare Heads- CrCFM @ Lift (Pro version only) 
The Port Flow Analyzer offers several report types to compare test results between 2 different heads.  These comparisons can be at relatively equal valve Lifts or L/Ds.  The report title Compare Heads- CrCFM @ Lift will compare Corrected CFMs between 2 heads at approximately the same valve lifts. 
The 2 tests or heads which are compared are: 
1. 
The current head. 

2. 
A head or flow test which you will be asked to pick from the Flow Test Library. 


There are several "Compare Tests" report types available, some making comparisons at equal valve Lifts and some at equal L/D.  (Actually, the Lifts or L/Ds do not have to be exactly equal, but within 5% of each other.) 
Only average data for a test is used for comparison.  The data from both heads is corrected to the Test Pressure, '' Water spec in the Make Reports menu.  This ensures you are making comparisons at the same test pressure. 
The report is made up of 2 basic sections: 
1. 
The Flow Test Description and Heads Specs.  This section lists the folder name, Test Name, date, time, and important head specs for both tests. 

2. 
The actual data with a difference calculation.  This is the section with the actual comparison.  The data for each head consists of 3 columns: 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
# Pnts  Is the number of data points which made up the average data.  For example, if the test had 4 ports  
flowed and each port had 1 reading at .300" lift, # Pnts would be 4.  
Lift  Is the valve lift or L/D for the data points.   
L/D  
Avg xxx  Is the average data being reported (CrCFM, Vlv Area, etc).  Definitions for possible data  
comparisons is given in the Calculated Data report section on page 65.  

--Difference--
CFM, Is the difference between the 2 tests or heads.  A negative number means the 2nd head had less Etc, CFM, Vlv Area in SqIn, etc. A difference is only calculated when the Lift or L/D between the 2 heads is within 5% of each other. 
% Is the difference between the 2 tests or heads in percent.  A negative number means the 2nd head had less CFM, Vlv Area in SqIn, etc. 
Figure 3.16 Portion of Compare Heads- CrCFM @ Lift Report Note that the 

See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


3.2 ASCII Data Files (Pro version only) 

You may want to use the results from the Port Flow Analyzer in other software packages. This could be for additional graph capabilities, statistical analysis, data basing, etc. Once you have created a report (as shown in Section 3.1), click on File to write the results to an ASCII file with a name of your choosing.  The ASCII File command is possible any time a report is displayed on the screen. 
You can only save the results currently displayed on the Report screen.  If you want to write an ASCII file of a test file you have previously run,  you must open that test file first, then create a report for that test file. 
ASCII File Options 
Comma Separated 
Select this option to insert commas between data points.  Leave this unchecked for data to be arranged in evenly spaced columns. 
Include Text 
Select this option to strip out all titles and letters, leaving only numbers. 
Convert to Columns 
If you do not select this option, data will be written to the file much like it is displayed in the report on the screen.  Select this option to have the report turned on its side, that is, the rows will become columns and the columns will become rows. 
File Name 
Enter a file name for saving this ASCII file. Checks are made to ensure what you enter is a valid file name and that you are not overwriting an existing file.  By default, the file is written to the Port Flow Analyzer folder (directory), the folder which contains the PFA.EXE program file.  However, version 3.5 lets you enter the entire path to write this to most any folder or drive on your computer. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
• 
There are certain limitations for file names, like they can not contain certain characters like / \ “ : *.  The program will warn you if you use an illegal character. 

• 
The name should not be VERY long (like over 40 characters) or the program may shorten it for you. 


See Section 3.6 for more details on file names 
See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.4 Graphs 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph menu command at the top of the Main Screen or clicking on the Summary Graph at the Main Screen. Figure 3.18 shows a typical graph and descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items. 
Appendix 9 describes the greatly expanded Graph features in the new Head Porter version. 
Figure 3.18 Primary Graph Screen Items Command buttons. Some commands can only be done through these buttons, some of these 


Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 

Vertical Y axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily changed as described in this section. 
Grid lines. The style or elimination of grid lines can be changed by clicking on Format, then Grid Style (Pro version only). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
There are 3 basic types of test data which can be graphed: 
• 
Flow Data like CFM, Swirl,  Instability, etc. vs valve lift or L/D. 

• 
Engine Data like Valve Lift, Valve Flow Area, etc. vs crank degrees (Pro Version Only). 

• 
Port Velocity Maps of port velocity data measured with a Pitot Tube (Pro Version Only). 


You determine which type of data you graph by the Graph Type in the Graph Options menu.  See Figure 3.19. 
Graph Type 
Several types of graphs can be picked by clicking on the down arrow key of this combo box.  Depending on your choice, several options in this menu may be enabled or disabled.  Table 3.4 lists these various Graph Types. 
Table 3.4 Data Types   
Corr Int & Exh CFM  Corr Int CFM  
Corr Exh CFM  Calc Int Velocities  
Calc Exh Velocities  Intake Swirl  
Int Swirl Stab  Intake Tumble  
Int Tumble Stab  Int & Exh Flow Coef  
Int Flow Coef  Exh Flow Coef  
% Exh/Int  Int Stability  
Exh Stability  Int & Exh Stability  
Int & Exh Flow+Valve Area  Int Flow + Valve Area  
Exh Flow + Valve Area  Int & Exh Flow Area+VlvLift  
Int Flow Area + Valve Lift  Exh Flow Area + Valve Lift  
Overlap Flow + Valve Area  Overlap Flow + Valve Lift  
Meas Int Vel (port map)  Meas Exh Vel (port map)  


Correct to New Test Pressure 
Pick Yes and the graph data will be corrected to the test pressures identified by the next one or two specs, New Int Test Pres, '' Water and New Exh Test Pres, '' Water.  Pick No and the data is corrected to the test pressure identified in the test's Test Options menu under Test Pressure. 
For several Graph Types, like Flow Area, or Flow Coef, no correction is possible or required and this spec is disabled (printed in gray and you are not allowed to change it).  
New Int Test Pres, '' Water 
The pressure the intake flow or velocity data is corrected to if the previous spec, Correct to New Test Pressure is set to Yes.  Note that if you flow a head at 10” and correct to say 28” you may get different results than if you had actually flowed the head at 28”.  This can be especially true of data other than CFM, like Swirl, Tumble, Stability, and Port Velocity readings. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
New Exh Test Pres, '' Water 
The pressure the exhaust flow or velocity data is corrected to if the previous spec, Correct to New Test Pressure is set to Yes. Note that if you flow a head at 10” and correct to say 28” you may get different results than if you had actually flowed the head at 28”.  This can be especially true of data other than CFM, like Swirl, Tumble, Stability, and Port Velocity readings. 
Which Cylinder(s) 
Click on the down arrow key of this combo box. to pick from Graphing: 
• 
All Cylinders tested 

• 
Average of all cylinders tested 

• 
Individual cylinders, which can be picked by the order they were recorded. 


If the test file was only for 1 cylinder, or for some graphs which require average data like Flow Area, this spec will be disabled. 
Notes: 
• 
If you pick Average, the average is based on all cylinders with data which is not 0.  For example, for 3 cylinders, it cylinder 1 is 20 CFM and cylinder 2 is 24 CFM and cylinder 3 is 0 CFM, the average is 22 CFM ((20+24)/2),  not 14.7 CFM ((20+24+0)/3). 

• 
If the cylinders are numbered 2, 4, 6 and 8 on the head, and you ask for the 4th cylinder, the graph will be for cylinder #8, not cylinder #4. 

• 
At this time, there is no way to graph the 3rd cylinder from the current test with the 1st cylinder of another test.  All cylinders (if you are graphing individual cylinders) must be in the same position. 


Tip: Although, there is no way to graph the 1st cylinder from the current test with the 3rd cylinder of another test, you can be “creative”. If you use the Edit command at the Main Screen on the current test, you can swap, say the 1st and 3rd cylinders.  Then you can graph the 1st cylinder from the current test (actually the 3rd cylinder) with the 1st cylinder of another test for comparison.  Just be sure to swap the 1st and 3rd cylinder back when you are done! 
Graphs Comparing More Than 1 Test (Basic Version) 
There are 3 basic types of tests which can be graphed in the Basic version: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results of the test file which you are working with on the Main Screen. 

• 
Last test results graphed. These are the test results which you previously included in the graph for comparison.  This allows you a way to easily refer back to one particular test for comparison. 

• 
Add Test lets you pick any test from the Test Library to compare to the Current test results.  This test now becomes the 


Last test results graphed. 
In the Basic version, you can only compare 1 additional test to the Current Test.  If an additional test is graphed for comparison, the Add Test command changes to Remove Test. You must first click on Remove Test before the Add Test command reapears so you can add a different test. 
Figure 3.20 Graphing Multiple Tests, Basic Version 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Graphs Comparing More Than 1 Test (Pro Version) 
There are 3 basic types of tests which can be graphed in the Pro version: 
• 
Current test results. These are the test results of the test file which you are working with on the Main Screen. 

• 
Tests marked in the History Log. These are the test results which you previously graphed, started new, opened, etc. which you have marked “Yes” to graph in the History Log  (see Section 3.8). 

• 
Add Test lets you pick any test from the Test Library to add to the top of the History Log, and mark as a test you want to graph.  Since it is at the top of the History Log, it should definitely be included in the next graph. 


In the Pro version, you can compare data from up to 6 tests, as long as there is room for the Legends (labels) for each graph on the right side of the graph.  Usually this ends up being about 24 graph lines, which could be 6 tests with 4 graph lines (for example, Int only for 4 cylinders), or 3 tests with 8 graph lines (for example, Int & Exh for 4 cylinders), etc. 
Figure 3.21 History Log (Pro version only See Section 3.8 for more details.) Click on the History Button or the History menu item to display the History Log. Click on Single Test to graph only the Current Test. 

Click on Add Test to pick a new test to add the graph to the History Log from the entire Test Library. 
Choose a ‘Graph’ option from the menu bar to close the Histroy Log and graph the tests identified by the menu option you pick. 
Click in this column 
This column shows the Click and drag slide bar toto show  Yes or Standard name the program will display entire History Log.
remove Yes.  Tests display in graph Legend for this Some tests marked Yes marked Yes will be test. Click on the name to may be at the bottom of thegraphed, if there is change it. Alternate names are Log and not be visible now.
room (typically not 
possible by clicking on Format,
more than 24 graph then Edit Titles.
lines total). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several other features, including: 
• 
Printing 

• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 


These are discussed in this next section. 
Printing 
Figure 3.22 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  Figure 3.23 shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup.  Figure 3.24 shows how you can add information to a graph printout by clicking on Format, then Edit Printed Comments and Data Output. 
Figure 3.22 Printing Graphs 
Click on File to display the 3 print menu options 
Click here to print the graph in color (solid lines). 
Click here to print the graph in black & white (various styles of dashed and solid lines). 
Click here change the printer or printer driver, page orientation, etc. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.24 Adding Information to a Graph Printout . (Most of these options have no effect on the graph on the screen, only the graph that is printed.) 
and disabled on this screen. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places.  See Figure 3.25 for explaining the use of the cursor. 

Figure 3.25 Cursor Features and Commands 
Cursor line, usually pink or green, depending on 
Click here to turn cursor ON. 
background color. Click here to turn cursor OFF. 
Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or right.  Hold down the <shift key> while clicking these buttons and the cursor moves faster.  You can enable the cursor by clicking on View, then Turn Cursor On. 

The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 


The X value of the cursor is shown here, in this case the Valve Lift of .320 “ . If you click on a graph line in between data points, the cursor will not appear. A data point is where you see a definite point or bend in a graph line. 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph 
line at a data point. This also provides a quick way to move 
the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the 
mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Changing titles and legend names (Pro version only) 
Many times you may want to customize a graph by displaying and printing labels of your choice.  Click on Format and then Edit Titles/Legend to bring up the menu shown in Figure 3.26 which will allow you to do this. 
Figure 3.26 Menu to Edit Title and Legend 
This is the list of Standard names the program uses unless you click on the Use New Titles button below. Select (click on) a Standard name you want to change.  The Standard Name appears in the edit box, along with the current New name if there is one. Once you have selected a name from this list (that row will be highlighted) it is easier to use the up and down arrow keys to select the next item to edit than clicking the item with the mouse. 
This is the list of New names the program will use if you click on Use New Titles. If a title in the List of New Names is blank, the program will use the Standard name. 
Standard name from row selected. 
New name for you to edit. Other options include clicking on the Copy Std Name to New or Blank Out New Name buttons. 


Click here to close this menu and use the New names you have entered. Where New names have been left blank, the Standard name will be used. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph.  The Pro has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures 3.27 and 3.28. 


Figure 3.28 Menu to Specify Graph Axes Scales 
loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. 
Click the Turn Autoscaling Off button to turn Autoscaling Off to enable changing specs in this menu. 
Click on OK to have the graph 
redrawn to these new scale 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Engine Data Graph Parameters (Pro version only) 
This section gives a brief description of all the possible Engine Data which can be graphed. 
Int Valve Lift  The theoretical position of the valve as directed by the cam profile in inches (cam lift x rocker arm ratio -    valve lash).  
Int Valve Area  The geometric intake valve opening in square inches based on Int Valve Lift.  Geometric valve opening is the actual area, and is defined on pages 68 and 69 as Vlv Area.  
Int Flow Area  The effective intake valve opening in square inches based on Int Valve Lift.  Effective valve opening is defined on page 70 as Flw Area and is calculated by:  
Int Flow Area = Geometric Area x Flow Coef  
Where Geometric Area and Flow Coef are changing at each lift point.  For example, if the valve  opening area is 1.5 square inches at .35" of valve lift, and the flow coefficient at .35" is .5, the In  Flow Area is .75 square inches at .35" valve lift.  
Exh Valve Lift  See Int Valve Lift above.  

Exh Valve Area See Int Valve Area above. Exh Flow Area    See Int Flow Area above. 
Figure 3.29 Example of Engine Data Graph 

This is an example of comparing Valve Lift and Flow Area for 2 different cams with the same head. 
Note that the total “integrated” Flow Area, Valve Area or Lobe Area is given in the Standard Legend titles. These areas are defined in Section 3.1 Reports on page 76. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Port Velocity Maps (Pro Version only) 
Port Velocity Maps are a very special type of graph, and should be discussed separately from the other graph types and features for those graphs. Port Velocity Maps are constructed from the port velocity readings recorded with a Pitot Tube.  With Port Velocity Maps, the color indicates the velocity at that particular portion of the port cross section.  The velocity indicated by the color is given in the Key in the lower right corner of the graph. 
Figure 3.30 Port Velocity Graphs By adjusting Scales (see Figure 3.28), you change which colors represent which velocities.  This can let you match another graph for a different head for comparison. 

Summary of Test Specs and Test Data graphed. 
Key to interpret which colors represent which velocities. 
Appendix 9 describes the greatly expanded Port Velocity Graph features in the new Head Porter version. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


3.5 Printer Output 
The Port Flow Analyzer can print the tabular test results of a report for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer icon.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.31 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the Option boxes.  All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 
Appendix 9 describes the expanded Print features in the version 3.5 B. 
Figure 3.31 Printer Button and Print Menu Command Options - Report Screen 
Click on Print or the Printer button (shown hidden here) for the Printout Options menu shown to the right. 
This options lets you choose the printer or printer driver being used by Windows and also page orientation. 
Check or uncheck these options, then click on this button to print the current report with these options. 
Check or uncheck these options, then click on this button to print a blank paper worksheet. This worksheet can be useful for recording data when your flow bench can not be next to your computer. 


Test Results Report Options 
Include Test Options Include Head Specs Include Head Details Specs (Pro Version Only) Include Flow Bench Specs Include Engine Specs (Pro Version Only) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Select these options if you want all the specs from these menus printed with the report.  This will add 1-2 pages to the printed report.  Note that only a few of the Test Options are printed which could affect the test results, not all specs from the Test Options menu. 
Include Test Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the Test File printed with the results. 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular report you send to the printer.  These "report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like modifications, engine results, etc. 
Larger Font (Print Size) 
Check this option if your particular printer is printing the results with a small print font.  This option will increase the font size for some parts of some reports.  Also see Preferences for Selecting Printer Fonts, page 26. 
Worksheet Options 
These options let you print a blank paper worksheet.  This worksheet can be useful for recording data when your flow bench can not be next to your computer. 
Use Standard Lifts 
Check this option to produce a worksheet where the valve lifts (or L/Ds) requested match the specs in the Test Options menu. A summary of these lifts or L/Ds is given below this option.  Uncheck this option, and the worksheet will include all lifts (or L/Ds) for the current test file.  This also means that the order of the lifts, any extra lift points in some or all ports, etc. will be included in the worksheet. 
Larger Space Between Lines 
Select this option if you want more space between lines, so you can write your numbers larger. 
Ask for Worksheet Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for to be printed at the top of your worksheet. 
Include Head Specs, etc. 
Select this option if you want all the specs from the Test Options Menu, Head Menu, Head Details Menu and Engine Specs menu printed with the report with a blank next to them.  This will add 1-2 pages to the printed report. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Other Print Options 
Other menus have print menu commands or print buttons as shown in Figures 3.32 and 3.33. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



3.6 Data Libraries 
The Port Flow Analyzer allows you to save a set of Flow Data and related specs (Head Specs, Test Options, etc) to the Test File Library under a name of your choosing.  You can then open these test files out of the Test File Library in the future for comparison or modification.  The Open window is below with explanations. 
Figure 3.34 Test Library Options 
Click on File, then Open (from all saved tests) to display Test Library shown here. 
Click on File, then Save or Save As to save current  test and specs to the Test Library. Total # Tests in Library under this Folder 

Name of chosen Test (currently highlighted in Test List) Click and drag slide bar to view all Tests in list 
Preview of Test 
h 
Single click on a Test 
to choose it for 
preview. Double click 
to immediately open it. 
Tests can be saved under various catagories (folders) to help you organize large #s of tests. Click on a different name here and a different list of Test Files will be displayed. The name “Folder” was called “Customer” in the DOS version, but can be changed in the 
Click here to Preferences menu to delete the most any word. chosen Test. 
Click here to bring up standard
Click here to bring up the Filter Options menu 
Windows File Open screen, to letwhere you can select to show only tests which you open a file in most any folderfit certain criteria. See Section 3.7. 
(directory) and disk drive. Click here to bring up “on screen” help. 
Click here to close the Test Library with No changes (without opening a test) 
Click here to open the chosen Test 
Select one of these options to list the test files alphabetically, either by test file name, or by head 
#. This option can save you time looking for a particular test file.  (Pro Version Only) 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Open a Test File 
To open a test file saved in the Test Library, click on File at the upper left corner of the Main Screen, then on the Open (from all saved tests). In the Pro version you have an additional option of  “Open (from History Log)” which will be discussed in Section 3.8. 
You will obtain the window shown on the previous page.  Single click on one of the tests in the list, or click and drag the slide button on the right side of the list to display more tests.  Once you single click on a test, it is now the Chosen Test File and a preview of the test is given in the Preview section.  If the file you chose was not a valid Port Flow Analyzer file (either Windows v3.0 or the older v2.1 for DOS), the program will tell you and you can not choose it. 
Once a test has been chosen, you can delete it by clicking on the Delete button, or Open it by clicking on the Open button in this window.  You can also click on a different test to Preview it or close this window and return to the Main Screen without choosing a new test file. 
If you are sure of the test you want to open, you can simply double click on it from the Test List.  This opens the test without a preview and closes this menu. 
Note for Pro Version:  You can also save sets of Head or Engine specs to their own separate libraries.  This is done very similarly as with the Test Files, except you click on File, then Open from the individual Head or Engine menus.  See Figure 3.35. 
Figure 3.35 Head (or Engine) File Options (Pro version only) 

Current Head File Name Click on File in the Head or Engine menus to Open a set of saved specs, or to save the current set of specs in just that screen. This allows you to build libraries of Heads and Engines for easily creating new tests in the future. 
• 
New blanks out the current specs and comments. 

• 
Open Example opens a library of example specs provided by Performance Trends. 

• 
Open Saved opens a library of specs you have saved. 

• 
Save saves the current specs to the same name as these specs are currently called. 

• 
Save As saves the current specs to a new name that you will enter. 


Save a Test File 
Before you discuss saving a test file, it is important for you to understand how the program opens and uses test files.  When you open a test from the Test Library, you are only using a copy of the test.  The original test file is kept in the library.   
As you make changes to the test, they are only made to this copy.  The original file is not changed.  If you want to delete your changes, you can simply open a fresh, unchanged copy of the original test file from the Library.  If you want to keep your changes, you must save them. This can be done by clicking on File, then Save.  You are also asked if you want to save your changes whenever you open a new test, and the program has detected you have made changes to the current file. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Figure 3.36 Saving Test File Options 


Click on File then Save As to bring up this Save menu. 

Click here to save specs to New Test name shown 

New name to save test data to. Leave unchanged and click OK to save to the current test name. (This would be the same as clicking on File, then Save.) Click on name in the box to change it, then click OK to save it to the new name. 
Name of current test file you are 
working with. 
Click on the down arrow button to pick a different flolder to save this test to.  Note that the top choice in this list is “Add New Folder”. Pick this option and then you can type in a new folder name, This new folder name will be added to the list so that you can save the test file to that folder if you wish.  The word “folder” can be changed to most any word in the Preferences menu. In the previous DOS version, this was the “Customer” name. 
Type in a New Folder Name here if you select “Add New Folder” as the Folder Name. 
Click here to bring up standard Windows File Save screen, to let you save a file in most any folder (directory) and disk drive, and to most any file name (Pro version only). Note that files saved this way are not found in the standard Test Library and are not “searchable” using the Filter options discussed in Section 3.7. 
To save a Test File, you will be presented with the Save Window as shown above.  The program suggests a new test name which is the same as the current test name shown at the top of the Main Screen.  If you want to save your changes to the same name, simply click on OK.  This will update the current test file with your latest changes. 
If you want to save the current set of test specs with your changes to a new name (and leave the current test file in the Library unchanged), then click on the suggested file name and modify it as you want.  For example, in the window shown above, you may want to add -2 to the current name PORTVEL.PTI to create PORTVEL.P-2 to indicate this is the 2nd revision of PORTVEL.PTI. This is the safest way to make changes, because you can always return to an earlier version and see what you had done. 
Certain file names are not acceptable, like names which include the characters:  /  \  :  |  <  >  “ * ?   The program will also shorted file names that are VERY long, like over 40 characters. 
Test files are saved to folders (directories) you have created in the PFADAT folder (directory) in the PFA30 folder (directory) under Program Files\Performance Trends\Port Flow Analyzer v3.5 folder (directory).  You can copy Windows Port Flow 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Analyzer files from programs on other computers to this folder (directory) and they will be found by the program.  The Windows Version 3.5 will read files produced with the older DOS v2.1 and Windows v3.0.  Just copy them into a folder under the PFADAT folder (other than the Examples folder). 
The method of saving Head and Engine  files is exactly the same as complete Test Files, except that you access the Save menu by clicking on File at the top of these individual menus, as shown in Figure 3.34. These files are saved to the HEAD and ENGINE folders (subdirectories). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.7 Filter Test Files (Pro Version Only) 
The Port Flow Analyzer has a powerful way to search for tests in the Test Library called the Filter Option.  Click on the Filter button in the Open Test File menu (Figure 3.34, page 101) to be presented with the screen shown in Figure 3.37 below. 
Figure 3.37 Filter Files Menu Click on the down arrow button to pick the spec or comment to 
Select And and the Test Files displayed must fit both conditions specified. Select Or and the Test Files displayed can fit either of the conditions specified. 

The settings in this screen will display all test files with the word BowTie (or bowtie or BOWTIE) somewhere in the test comments and with the word Johnson (or johnson or JOHNSON) somewhere in the Customer description (a spec in the Head Specs menu). 
The Filter Feature is very useful for finding a specific test or to find all the tests which meet a certain set of conditions. For example, say you want to find a test that Operator “Jack” ran for Customer “Smith” on a “Big Block Chevy” head. Or, say you are having problems with a certain brand of intake valve seal, where the part # starts with "NAP".  Or perhaps you want to find all Small Block Chevy heads that flowed over 200 CFM on the exhaust.  In all these cases, the filtering specs would allow you to find the test files. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
First you must select the condition you want to look for by clicking on the down arrow button on the 'This comment or spec' box. Your choice of this spec will determine what the 'Has this relationship' options are, and what specs can be entered in the 'To what I enter here' spec. 
You can select up to 3 conditions to look for.  For the Operator “Jack”, Customer “Johnson”, “Big Block Chevy” example above, you would need to search for 3 conditions.  For the valve seal example, you could just search for 1 condition.  You add conditions by checking the 'Include this condition also' box.  This enables the other specs for each condition. 
If more than 1 condition is being used for the search, you must determine if you want the search to include tests which fit ANY of the conditions (Or) or must match ALL conditions (And).  For example, if you are looking for tests run by either Operator Jack or Operator Joe, you would select “Or”.  If you want Tests which flowed more than 300 CFM on Intake and were done since Jan 1999 (the tests must match both conditions), you would select “And”. 
The 3 command buttons will do the following: 
Show Files Only Fitting These Conditions will return you to the Open Test File screen.  Only files fitting these conditions will be displayed (which may be no files in some situations).  You can click on various folders (or whatever name you have given to folders in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen) to see if there are any matches in other folders. 
Turn Off Filtering (show all files) will return you to the Open Test File screen and now all files will be displayed. 
Print List of All Files Fitting These Conditions will search through the entire Test Library (all folders in the PFADAT folder) for files matching these conditions and display them in a new screen.  From this screen, you can also print the list. This is the quickest way to see which folders may contain test files matching your conditions. 
Tip:  When looking for a word, the program doesn’t care if it is in CAPITAL (upper case) or small (lower case) letters. In Figure 3.37 above you are looking for the word BowTie in the test comments.  The program will display all files which have the word “BowTie” or the word “BOWTIE” or the word “bowtie” or the word “BowTIE” anywhere in the comments.  The program will not find files with the words “Bow Tie” (with a space between Bow and Tie) .  Therefore, it may be smarter to just look for the word “bow” to avoid this problem.  Note, however, that if you do this, the program will also find tests with the word “elbow”  or “crossbow” , for example, in the test comments. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.8 History Log (Pro Version Only) 
Click on File, then Open form History Log at the Main Screen to obtain the History Log shown below in Figure 3.38.  This screen shows a summary of the results for the last 25-100 tests you have worked with (started new, opened, graphed, etc.)  The number of tests in the log (25-100) is selectable in the 'Preferences' menu at the Main Screen.  When you work with a new test, it is added to the top of the History Log, and (if the Log is full) the last run drops off the bottom of the list.  In the Pro Version, the History Log is an alternate way to Open tests which have been saved to the Test Library.  The advantage of the History Log is it lists the tests you most recently worked with at the top.   
See Appendix 7, 9, 10 for new features added in version 3.5, 3.5B, 3.5C. 

was saved to a standard folder (directory, or whatever you have chosen to call folders in the Preferences menu), the folder name is given first, followed by the test file name. 
If a test file has been Opened from or Saved to a non-standard folder (a folder not in the PFADAT folder) using the 'Advanced' function, the entire path is given. If the 'Path and File Name' won't fit, it is shortened and preceded by '...'. 
You can choose to Save certain results you believe are special and you may want to recall or graph in the future by clicking on the Save column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Save eventually move to the bottom of the History Log, but are never dropped off the list or erased until you again click on the Yes to make it blank. 
Note that just the Test File Name stays in the History Log.  Should you delete the file using the Open (from all saved tests) command, the test file will be deleted.  When you try to open it or graph if from the History Log, you will get note saying the file can not be found. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
You can print the History Log on a printer by clicking on the 'Print' menu command.   Note that the History Log will be most readable when the Page Orientation is in Landscape setting. 
The Max CFMs listed are corrected to whatever test pressure have specified in the 'Preferences' menu.  Max CFMs and Valve Diameters are handy to remind you what a test was, and for comparing different tests. 
History Log at Graph Screen 
At the Graph Screen, several options are available to graph selected tests from the History Log, and change the Graph Titles.  You can obtain the History Log by clicking on the menu command History Log at the top of the Graph Screen.  The History Log is how you graph different tests together for comparison.  From this screen you can: 
• 
Choose to Graph certain Test Results by clicking on the Graph column to insert a Yes there.  Tests marked Yes to Graph will be graphed when you click on the 'Graph Tests Marked 'Yes' '.  The first test (usually the current Flow Test you are working with) is always graphed even with no Yes marked.  The number of tests actually graphed are limited by available space, usually a limit of about 24 graph lines total.  

• 
Graph only the current test results (the test file at the top of the Log) by clicking on 'Graph Current Test Only'. 

• 
Click on 'Graph Title' to change the Standard Title for this test.  The program defaults to putting in the Head # unless it is blank, when it then puts in the test file name.  (You can also specify 'Alternate' titles and legend names by clicking on 'Format' at the top of the Graph Screen, then 'Edit Titles/Legends'.)   

• 
Choose to Save certain results you believe are special and you may want to recall or graph in the future.  See the Save explanation of the previous page. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Chapter 4 Examples 
Each example in this chapter becomes progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated.  
The results shown in these examples may be somewhat different than what you obtain with your particular version of the program That is due to minor upgrades in the calculations in later versions. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.1 Flow Test On a New Type of Head Using a SuperFlow 600* Flow Bench without Electronics 
See Appendix 7 for using the easy “EZ Start Wizard”, added in version 3.5. 
This example demonstrates the basic steps for running a flow test.  You will use a 2 cylinder Yamaha head and assume that no similar head has been flowed before.  Therefore, no similar Test Files are available from the Flow Test Library from which a New Test could be developed.  You will be “starting from scratch”. 
The Port Flow Analyzer has several options for filling in head data on the Test Data grid.  The particular steps given below are not the only way to run this flow test. 
Start the program by clicking on Start, then Programs, then Perf Trends, then Port Flow Analyzer v3.5, or just double clicking on the desktop Icon.  When you enter the Port Flow Analyzer, you may see the question in Figure 4.1.  If you answer No, you will start with a blank screen.  If you answer Yes, the program will put you back to precisely where you were when you last quit the program.  Even though you are starting a New Test, click on Yes to bring up the last test you were working with. 


Figure 4.2.  As the Tip in Figure 4.2 says, it is always easiest to start with a Flow Test file that is as close as possible to the flow test to be performed.  This prevents us from having to make major changes to test information like the Head Specs, Test Options, etc. However, since you have not flowed a head like this one, you can start this test with whatever the Current Test is. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The New Test screen appears as in Figure 4.3.  There are 4 critical specs at the top which must be filled out or picked. 
If this is the first New Test you have run (you just got the program), you will be given notice that you must also fill out the Master Flow Bench Specs before starting a New Test. To correctly understand the Flow Bench Specs and what the Master Flow Bench Specs are, you will need a little background. 


Figure 4.3 
4 Critical specs for the new test are listed here at the top. 
Click here to start a New Test based on these settings. 
If this is the first time you have started a New Test and you haven’t set up any Master Flow Bench specs, the preview will say no Master Bench Specs. You will have to fill out the Bench Specs menu before you can start the New Test. 
A summary of the current settings is given here. 
Click on these buttons to see the current settings. 
these specs for the new test. Once the new test is started you can then make modifications to these specs if you want. 
Setting Up Flow Bench Specs for a New Program 
A flow test is made up of 4 major parts (6 with Pro version): 
Flow Bench Specs (see Section 2.6) Head Specs (see Section 2.4) Test Options (see Section 2.3) Head Details  (see Section 2.5) (Pro Version Only) Actual Flow Data (see Section 2.1) Engine Specs  (see Section 2.7) (Pro Version Only) 
Of these, the Flow Bench Specs and the Actual Flow Data are the most important for accurate data.  The Actual Flow Data you enter into the Flow Test Data grid are the pressures from the manometers (and temperatures for certain benches).  These are obvious to the user since no CFM is calculated without these being entered. 
The Flow Bench Specs are stored in a separate menu, but have as much effect on the CFM accuracy as the manometer readings.  Once you have set the Bench Specs to match your bench, you will not change them unless the bench or recording electronics change.  However, you must initially set them to match your bench. 
At the New Test screen, you can open up the Flow Bench Specs menu by clicking on the See Specs button next to the Flow Bench option. When you open up the Flow Bench Specs from the New Test screen, the program displays the Master Bench Specs, Figure 4.4. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
If the Master Bench Specs are blank: 
1. 
The program will give you tips to first, choose your type of Flow Bench 

2. 
Then depending on the type of bench you picked, it will ask if there are any electronics used for recording data. 

3. 
Then depending on the type of bench you picked, it will ask you to enter in the CFM for the Flow Ranges for your bench. For a SF 600 you are using in this example, this would be the 6 Intake and 6 Exhaust CFMs you got on a calibration card from SuperFlow with your bench. 


With the Master Bench Specs filled out, click on Back (OK) at the top left of the Bench Specs screen to return to the New Test Screen. 
Figure 4.4 Filling Out Master Bench Specs for First Time 1 Tip messages will first instruct you to pick the general Type of Flow Bench. For this example, we picked a SuperFlow 600. 
2 A tip message will instruct you to pick the type of electronics you will be using with the Flow Bench. For this example, we picked None. 
3 For a SuperFlow 600 bench, you should fill in the full scale CFM flows for each of the 6 ranges, intake and exhaust. 

Filling Out Other Specs to Start a New Test 
If you start with a blank test, or want to modify some specs from the previous test, click on the 'See Specs' buttons for each category of specs. Click on Help at these menus for more info on how to enter these specs. 
Since you have not run a Yamaha head before, the head specs currently loaded are probably quite different than the Yamaha you will run.  Therefore, you will uncheck the Head Specs option to leave Head Specs blank (for now)  with this new test.  The same could be said about all other categories of specs.  Therefore, you will uncheck all categories except the Flow Bench.  
Most specs in these categories can be changed once the test has started with no problems, which is what you will do in this example.  However, there are four other critical specs listed separately at the top.  These must be filled out before you can start the new test:  
1. File Name for New Test is the file name the program will create for saving the Flow Data for the new test you are starting. The program fills in a default name of the current test name, but incrementing the last digit in the name by 1.  You can change this name to most anything you like.  The program will warn you if the name entered is not valid and show you what is wrong.  For this example, type in the name: 600CC-4VLV for this 4 valve Yamaha head. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
2. Operator for New Test is the name of the operator for this test.  Click on Pick to pick an operator name already used or to enter a new name.  The program defaults to the operator of the current test.  Through the Operator Menu discussed in Section 2.1, you enter a new Operator name of Jack. 
3. 
Head # for New Test is critical for shops who use a head numbering system.  Click on Assign to create a new Head # based on the last Head # assigned (incremented up by 1) or to start with a new type of Head #. Through the Head # Menu discussed in Section 2.4, you enter a new Head # of TCPerf-0002. 

4. 
Folder Name for New Test is the folder in the PFADAT folder where the test will be saved. The program may not be using the name 'folder' for spec, but whatever word you have assigned in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen.  The folder name 'Examples' is reserved for Performance Trends example tests supplied with the program, and can not be used for your tests. By clicking on Add New, you use the new folder of YAMAHA. 



The New Test screen should now look like Figure 4.5.  When you are ready to start the New Test, click on 'Start New Test' at the top of the screen.  If some critical specs have not been entered, the program will warn you and ask you for it at that time.  These include Intake Valve Diameter, Exhaust Valve Diameter and Test Pressure.  The program will fill in the Test Time and Date based on the computer's time and date.  This can be changed later by clicking on the Test Time/Date at the Main Screen. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Click on Test Options at the top of the Main Screen to open the Test Options menu (Figure 4.7)  There you can fill out any or all the specs which pertain to this test. Click on Head at the top of the Main Screen to open the Head Specs menu (Figure 4.7) to enter specs about this head you are flowing. 
Figure 4.7 Filling Test Options and Head Specs Menus 
These specs determine what valve lifts are automatically generated by the program. Note the preview shows the pattern of the lifts. The head porter in this example typically tests .025, .050, .100, .150, .200, .250, .300 inches valve lift (not L/D) and then double checks .150 again. The .000 point is also tested to check leakage. 
Select None for Port Velocities because we are not recording port velocities with a Pitot Tube. 
Select “Calculate from data entries” for recording CFM Flow. For this simple test, you select to only record CFM, so other data types are set to “Don’t Record”. 
This is not mandatory, but when all specs and Head Comments are filled in, click on File, then Save As and save these Head Specs to the Head Library with the Head Name “YAM600-4VLV” (Pro version only). This would let you Open a file of these Yamaha head specs some time in the future, saving you from typing them again. 
Select the Port Layout, which for this head is 2 intake and 2 exhaust valves, each valve having its own individual port. 
Fill in other head specs for more advanced analysis and for documenting this heads specs. 
Set this spec to 2 to tell the program you are going to test 2 cylinders on this head. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
After filling out the Test Options and Head Specs as shown in Figure 4.7,  the Main Screen looks more like you are ready to test.  Valve lifts and L/Ds are filled in as specified in the Test Options menu.  However, the .025 and the recheck of .150 valve lift points are not filled in.  You can manually insert a blank row in ahead of the .050 valve lift row as shown in Figure 4.8.  Then you can type in the .025” and .150” recheck points. 
At the Main Screen, you can also start typing in test comments. For the first comment, you can enter something descriptive like: 
Ed's 600 cc Yamaha 4 valve - before porting 
Now the Main Screen looks similar to Figure 4.9, so now you can start recording actual flow data. 

Recording Flow Data 
Set up the bench and head to flow Cylinder #1's intake port.  It is necessary to first measure the amount of CFM leakage.  (Before checking leakage, be sure that the Leakage value at the Main Screen is set to 0.  See Figure 4.9.) 
With the intake valve closed and the intake port sealed with tape, start the bench and set approximately 28" water Test Pres. Select the lowest flow range on the bench to measure leakage: Range #1.  Enter 1 for Range, and the actual pressures you observe of Test Pres = 27.4" and Flow Pres = 7% as shown in Figure 4.9.   
Figure 4.9 Recording Flow at .000 Lift to Determine Leakage 1 Be sure this leakage value is set to 0 before trying to measure Leakage CFM. 

Set up the flow bench to record CFM flow at .000 valve lift on the most sensitive range (#1). Type in the Range, Test Pres (vertical manometer) and Flow Pres (inclined manometer %) and the program calculates CFM flow of 25CFM 
Type in 2.5 CFM as the Leakage #. CFM for point 1 (.000 lift) now drops to 0 CFM. This is as it should be, because the 2.5 CFM was not going through the valve because the valve was closed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

This data calculates a leakage of 2.5 CFM. (Note that an accurate leakage CFM can only be calculated when Leakage is set to 0 shown in Figure 4.9.  Enter leakage by clicking on Leakage and typing in 2.5.  You will notice that the CFM for Point #1 is now 0.  This shows the leakage correction is working properly to correct for the 
2.5 CFM coming from other sources (not the valve). 
Start recording actual flow data at this time.  Open the intake valve to .025" as indicated in the Lift column for row 2. Adjust flow to obtain 28" of Test Pres on the vertical manometer.  Wait a few seconds to let the Test Pres and Flow Pres on the inclined manometer stabilize. 
Enter both Test Pres and Flow Pres as accurately as can be read on the manometer.  Although a 

setting of 28.0" of Test Pres was desired, it may actually settle out at 28.15".  The inclined manometer gives a reading of 48%.  Enter these values and the program will calculate a CFM value of 14.7 CFM, which is corrected for leakage and to 28.0" Test Pres. Also note that Point 2 has been graphed on the Summary Graph.  See Figure 4.10.  Continue setting valve lifts as indicted in the Lift column.  For each lift, select the proper flow range and enter the Range, Test Pres and Flow Pres as done before, until there are readings for all Lift points.  See Figure 4.10.   
Flow Exhaust Port 
With one intake port completed, you can now flow this cylinder's exhaust port.  Set up the head and flow bench to flow the exhaust port of #1 cylinder.  Advance to the Exh Port Test Data grid for cylinder #1 by clicking on the Tab at the top.  See Figure 4.10.   
You may notice a short message saying “Saving to Temporary File” appear for about a second.  Whenever you change ports, or return from a menu like Head Specs, the program saves a temporary copy of the flow test.  Should you loose power, or should the program “bomb”,  most of your data will be saved.  If this happens, when you restart the program the 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
program will give the message shown in Figure 4.11.  If you answer Yes, the program will restore your data up to the point the program last saved it.  For added insurance, you can periodically click on File, then Save to permanently save your latest changes to the Test Library while running the flow test. 
At the Exhaust Screen, most valve lifts will be generated, but not the .025 and the .150 you added manually for the Intake Port.  Add these lift points as done for the Intake Port. 
With the exhaust valve closed, the exhaust port sealed with tape, and 0 Leak CFM entered for this port, measure leakage.  Enter the 3.0 CFM leakage by clicking on Leakage and typing in 3.  Record flow data for the exhaust port by following the steps done on the Intake Port. Generally exhaust ports do not flow as well as intake ports because they are smaller. 
With Cylinder #1 completed, you interrupt the flow test for 3 hours for lunch and to do some office paperwork.  When you return you make a note of the 3 hr interruption in the by typing in the Comments section something like “Cylinder #2 flowed after 3 hour delay.” 
Tests are now completed for the intake and exhaust ports for cylinder #1, so set up to flow the intake port of cylinder #2.  Advance to the intake port Test Data grid for cylinder #2 by clicking on the Int #2 tab.  The Test Data grid is now blank except for the standard valve lifts and the Range #. Once cylinder #1 has been flowed, the program assumes the other ports will flow somewhat similar to cylinder #1, and are therefore likely to use the same flow range at the same lifts.  You still must manually insert the .025 and .150 valve lifts and run the leakage test. 
Follow the same procedure for flowing cylinder #2, Intake and Exhaust as for Cylinder #1. When you are done and the entire cylinder head has been tested, be sure to save the data by clicking on File, the Save. Reports and graphs as shown in Examples 
4.3 and 4.4 are now possible. 
Note:  There are many alternate ways to perform this flow test.  For  example, flow all the intake ports and then all the  exhaust ports. This example is only one suggested method used to  illustrate the Port Flow Analyzer's commands and options. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.2 Running Flow Test On Type of Head Which Has Been Flowed Before, Using FlowCom 
This example is similar to Example 4.1.  Therefore, only major differences between the two examples will be discussed in detail.  Note, file XFRD185.PTI  has been changed to “Example SB Ford SF 110 w Port Velocity” in version 3.5. 
This example will demonstrate the basic steps for running a flow test when there is a Test File saved which is similar to the test to be performed.  You will be testing a small block Ford 302 head, similar to the XFRD185.PTI file saved in the Examples folder of the Flow Test Library. You will flow the head on a SuperFlow 110 bench, using SuperFlow’s FlowCom electronics for recording data.  The Port Flow Analyzer has several options for filling out the Test Data grid.  The particular steps given below are not the only way to run this flow test. 
Note:  Do not install the head on the bench yet, so you can do a bench calibration.  This is discussed later in this chapter. 
Starting a New Test 
First, open a Flow Test file which is very similar to the head, flow bench specs and Test Options for this New Test.  This can be done by clicking on File, then Open (from all saved tests) at the Main Screen.  The Flow Test Library is shown in Figure 4.12 will be displayed. 
You may first have to switch to the EXAMPLES folder by clicking on EXAMPLES in the list of folders if it was not already highlighted.  Then find and click on the XFRD185.PTI test file to obtain the preview.  This file contains example flow data from a Ford 302 on a SuperFlow 110 flow bench.  Click on the Open button and a copy of this file will be opened to use as the pattern (template) for this New Test. 
At the Main Screen, click on File, then New Test to obtain the screen shown in Figure 4.17.  You may notice a Tip message when you open the New Test 
Figure 4.12 Open a Previous, Similar Test File 

as the pattern for the New Test.  This test  folder where the  
file now becomes the current test, the  test file we will  
same as if you had simply wanted to look  use as a pattern  
at it, edit it or make a report of it.  is stored.  

Screen saying it is best to pattern the New Test after some previous test (Figure 4.13).  Since the XFRD185.PTI test file is a good pattern (that’s why we opened it), simple click on OK to close this Tip message window. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
At the New Test screen, think about the New Test and the head you are going to flow. Then you must decide how much of the XFRD185.PTI test file you can keep for this new test. 
Flow Bench:  If you were actually doing this example in your shop, your Master Flow Bench specs should already be for a SuperFlow 110. 
(If you are simply following this example by going through these steps, your Master Flow Bench may not be a SuperFlow 110.  If this is the case, and you want the Master Flow Bench specs to match those of the XFRD185.PTI test, click on ‘Cancel (don’t start a new test’ at the top of the New Test screen.  Then click on Flow Bench at the top of the Main Screen.  You should get a message which says the current Flow Bench Specs for XFRD185.PTI does not match your Master Flow Bench specs, which you already know.  Click on OK to clear this message, then click on File, then Save as My Master Bench Specs. This will save the Bench Specs for Test File XFRD185.PTI as the Master Bench Specs.  Then click on Back (ok) to close the Flow Bench menu.  Then click on File, then New Test to return to the New Test screen.) 
To tell the program you are using a FlowCom to record the data, select “FlowCom”  as the Type in the Electronics section of the Flow Bench specs menu (shown in Figure 4.14).  When you are using the FlowCom, it is also critical to have the FlowCom accurately reading the temperatures and pressures.  The process of checking and adjusting the electronics to match the manometers and thermometers is called calibration. Use the process outlined in the FlowCom instructions from SuperFlow to calibrate the FlowCom.  While running the test, you can check the calibration of the FlowCom, which will be discussed later in this example.  (If you were using Performance Trends Electronic Interface, you would calibrate the Port Flow Analyzer program following the procedures in Appendix 5.) 

Figure 4.14 Flow Bench Specs For a SuperFlow 110, the settings are quite simple. Simply select Std SuperFlow 110 as the Type and most other specs are disabled because the program knows what the settings should be. 

Select SuperFlow FlowCom for the Type of Electronics. 
Set # Readings to 10, which is a good compromise between accuracy and program speed. If you select to also record test “Stablility”, you may want to increase this # to 15 to 25 readings for a better reading of “Unstbl +/-%”. See Figure 4.16. 
Head:   Since the head being tested is so similar to the head you are starting with, changes to the Head Specs should be few if any.  Click on the See Specs button by Head Specs.  The cylinder head you will flow is a Ford small block V-8 head with 1.84" 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

diameter intake valves and 1.54" diameter exhaust valves.  Stem diameters are 5/16" (.343").  Cylinder numbering is 1 2 3 4 and all cylinders will be tested.   
Intake port dimensions are approximately 4.5" long and 162 CCs.  Exhaust port dimensions are 1.2" wide x  1.4" high by about 3” in length.  You estimate both ports to be rectangular in shape.  For these port specs, when you type in a Port CCs, Width, Height or Length, one or more of the other specs are recalculated to keep these specs consistent with each other. All you need to do is type in the specs you know, and the other specs are calculated for you. 
Fill in other head specs you know, like Head #, Customer name, and any comments which are particular to this head.  Completely filling out these specs will make your past tests a valuable reference in the future.  Your Head specs menu should now look like Figure 4.15. 
Head Details:  For users of the Pro version, click on the See Specs button by Head Details.  Check if any of these entries match the parts or components used for this new head.  Lets say in this case, very few entries match the new head.  Click on Back (ok) to return to the New 
Figure 4.16 Test Options for the New Test
Test screen. Keep the Head Details option unchecked, which will blank out all Head Details once you start the New Test. 
Note that specs for any category which is uncheck (indicating the specs will be blanked out) will not be blanked out until you actually start the New Test.  This way you can view the specs with the See Specs button and decide if you want to keep them or blank them out. 
Test Options:   Click on the See Specs button by Test Options.  Since the test to be run is so similar to the test data you are starting with, changes should be few if any.  Figure 
4.16 shows a Test Options 
Most specs can be used “as is” from the XFRD 185 PTI test 

Select to record port velocities at .600” lift. Also, select to have velocity corrected for the barometer reading, standard with the FlowCom. 
The CFM Flow options include recording test Stability, (Unstbl +/-%) which is useful, especially when using the FlowCom. 
Select to record Barometer also, since the port velocities will be corrected for Barometer. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
menu for the conditions described below: 
• 
These flow tests are run at lift increments of  .000 .050 .100 .200 .300 .400 .500 .600 .  (All these lift points will be generated by the settings in the Test Options menu, except .050”.  This will be discussed under Test Pattern.) 

• 
The .000 Lift point is used to check leakage. 

• 
Test pressure is held to 10" water for intake and exhaust. 

• 
You are recording port velocities with a Pitot tube at .600" lift only, so set the Port Velocity spec Type to “Record 9 points at 1 lift” and First Lift to Record Velocity to .600. 

• 
The FlowCom has a barometer sensor which reads pressure directly, not pressure corrected to sea level.  This barometric pressure can be used to improve the accuracy of the port velocity readings.  Therefore, for the Data spec, pick “Enter Vel (corr for Baro if FlowCom)”. 

• 
Also, select to Record Barometer so you will know in the future what the barometric pressure was.  


Test Pattern: The Test Pattern is the valve lifts and/or L/Ds, the order of the valve lifts and any repeats, and the flow bench ranges. Check this box to keep the same pattern.  For this example, checking Test Pattern will add the .050” lift point (all others would have been created by the Test Options Valve Lift specs), and keep the Flow Bench Ranges from the XFRD185.PTI test. 
Test Comment:  If the XFRD185.PTI test had many detailed comments, you may want to keep them if they also applied to this New Test.  Then you could always make minor adjustments to them once the test started.  However, since the XFRD185.PTI test’s comments are very brief, you uncheck Test Comments to blank them out when you start the New Test. 
Engine:  The Engine Specs will provide necessary engine dimensions for more detailed analysis.  It may be convenient to keep the same Engine Specs so a direct comparison can be made between the XFRD185.PTI test and this New Test.  If the Engine Specs are the same, the only difference should be due to the cylinder head specs and flow data.  Therefore, keep the Engine Specs checked to keep them the same. 
Top 4 Specs: Now, fill out the 4 critical specs listed at the top of the New Test Screen as described in Example 4.1. For File Name, the program took the XFRD185.PTI and changed the last letter I to the number 1. However, this name is not very descriptive, so you type in the name to MOD-FORD. Click on Pick to pick the Operator name of Jack used in Example 4.1. Pick a new Head # pattern as discussed in Section 2.4 of SBFord-0034.  If the XFRD185.PTI file had not been opened from the EXAMPLES folder, but instead from, say, the SB-FORD folder, you could use that same folder for this new test.  However, the program does not let you save New Tests to the EXAMPLES folder (to prevent you from changing example tests provided by Performance Trends).  Therefore, click on the Add button and enter the folder name of SB-FORD. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now, the New Test screen should look like Figure 4.17.  Click on 'Start New Test' at the top of the screen. The program will fill in the Test Time and Date based on the computer's time and date.  (If your computer clock is not correct, or for most any other reason, this time and date can be changed later by clicking on the Test Time/Date at the Main Screen.)  You will be returned to the Main Screen, which should now look like Figure 4.18. 
Figure 4.18 Main Screen for Starting New Test Click on FlowCom to bring up FlowCom screen showing FlowCom readings. 
Notice that Test Comments have been blanked out. 
Click here to bring up the Test Correction Menu. 
Keeping the Test Pattern keeps Valve Lift and L/D, and Range. 

Recording Data 
SuperFlow recommends calculating a Test Correction for the SF 110 bench occasionally, as discussed in Section 2.10, on page 
57. The start of a new test is a good time to do it.  Install the test orifice supplied by SuperFlow on the bench  with just the small hole open (plug the big hole).  SuperFlow says you should get from 3.5 to 5.5 CFM with just the small hole open. 
Start the bench and set the Flow Bench Range to 1 and the flow direction to Intake.  Follow the exact procedure as described on page 57. Set the Leakage value on the Main Screen to 0.  
You will use this New Test’s Test Data screen to calculate flow for the orifice plate.  Once you have calculated a new Test Correction Factor, you will erase any data you recorded.  You are simply using the Test Data screen as a “scratch pad”. 
To record data accurately, click on FlowCom at the top of the Main Screen to open up the FlowCom screen.  When the bench is reading about 10” Test Pres and with the Range set to Range 1 on the flow bench and on the FlowCom screen, click on Record or press <F1> to record CFM flow.  The FlowCom will take the 10 readings as you have directed in the Flow Bench Specs, fill in the 1st row in the Test Data grid with the readings, and calculate 4.8 CFM.  Since this is within the 3.5 to 5.5 CFM range, you can go to the next step.  Nothing is done with this 4.8 CFM reading. See Figure 4.19. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.19 Obtaining Test Correction Factor Data with FlowCom Set Leakage to 0 
Set 10” test pressure on vertical manometer with Range #1. (Note that this FlowCom screen shows readings for 2nd row. The FlowCom screen automatically advances to the next row after recording data. 
Click on Record or press <F1> to record CFM with the small orfice open. 

4.8 CFM recorded for the small hole only. This verifies there are few if any leaks as 4.5 CFM is the number you should get for the small hole. 

Set a higher range to record about 150 CFM flow Adjust Test Pressure to get about 10” 
Click on Record or press <F1> to record 151.6 CFM fl 
Click on Close to return to Main Screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now you need to obtain the flow reading with both holes of the orifice open.  Open both the big and small holes of the orifice plate.  Set the Range to Range 9 on both the flow bench and on the FlowCom screen.  When readings have stabilized, record the flow reading. 
The old Test Correction was 1.021.  For the new test, you obtained 151.6 CFM with the test orifices which SuperFlow rates at 
153.2 CFM.  Close the FlowCom screen and click on the Test Corr box to bring up the Test Correction calculation screen shown in Figure 4.20.  Type in your results of 151.6 with a standard orifice plate rated at 153.2.  This gives a new Test Correction of 
1.032. This means the program will increase all CFM data 3.2% because the bench appears to be reading about 3.2% too low.   
Note that the math here is not straightforward, because the 151.6 CFM reading was calculated using a Test Correction of 1.021. Without this correction, the CFM flow would have been 148.5 CFM (153.2/148.5 = 1.032).  See Figure 4.20. 
Click on the Use Calc Value at the bottom of the Test Correction menu to load in this Test Correction.  The program asks if 
1.032 should be saved as the Test Correction for the Master Flow Bench specs also.  Answer Yes, which means for all New Tests, 1.032 will be used until you go through the procedure again.  Notice that the 151.6 CFM you recorded changes to 153.2 CFM with the new Test Correction of 1.032. This shows the Test Correction is working correctly because 153.2 CFM is what SuperFlow says the orifice should flow. 
The Test Correction should always be between .900 and 1.100 and should not change much from time to time. If it was unusually high or low, or very different from the previous Test Correction, the program would warn you to check for errors. Performance Trends suggests not to overdo recalculating the Test Correction factor.  Checking the Test Correction every 5 to 10 tests is about right.  If the Test Corr stays pretty constant,  you have a good flow bench and are probably doing things correctly.  If the Test Correction changes a lot from check to check, you probably have a problem with the bench (intermittent leaks), are misunderstanding the procedure, or a not doing things the same from check to check. 
Figure 4.20 Calculating Test Correction Factor Click on Test Corr box to open Calc Test Correction menu. 
Select this option to type in CFM readings 

Type in the CFM flow you obtained with the orifice plate. 
Click on Use Calc Value button to use the new Test Correction. 
Click on Yes to keep this Test Correction with the Master Bench Specs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now remove the orifice plate and install the head on the bench with the correct bore adapter to flow Cylinder #1's intake port. (Be sure to record the bore adapter diameter in the Test Options menu.)  It is  necessary to first measure the CFM leakage. 
Perform the check just as done for the orifice plate:  set leakage to zero,  close the valve and close off the port with tape, record flow with the FlowCom at Range 1,  close FlowCom screen and type in the Leakage flow recorded of 2.2 CFM.   As in Example 4.1, after entering 2.2 CFM Leakage, the CFM for Row 1 goes to zero.  This shows the leakage correction factor is working properly. 
Remove the tape from the port and open the FlowCom screen again.  Since the first row at .000 valve lift has been filled in with the Leakage data, select Data Point #2 from the FlowCom screen.  Notice that row #2 is now highlighted in the Test Data grid and the valve lift and Range from row #2 are filled in on the FlowCom screen.  All you have to do is set the valve lift, set the Range and readjust flow control to maintain approximately 10" Test Pres.  When this has been done, click on the Record command or press <F1>.  The program will take 10 readings, average them, calculate CFM and fill the results in the Test Data grid, and advance to the next row.  If the head being tested flows significantly different than the old head, you may need to change the Range on the FlowCom screen as needed. 
Figure 4.21 Recording Data with FlowCom 

After reopening the FlowCom screen after entering the Leakage #, click on Data Point #2 to advance to Row #2, .050” valve lift. 
Note that Valve Lift & Range #s are loaded from the data already entered for this row in the Test Data grid. 
All you need to do is set Test Pressure to about 10”, set the range on the flow bench, and then press <F1> to record data. 
The program points out settings not the same between the Port Flow Analyzer and FlowCom. These differences may not be important. See Tips on this page. 
Tips using FlowCom: 
The FlowCom can also calculate CFM based on readings which you must “type” into it.  Typing into the FlowCom (basically pressing buttons like a hand calculator) is cumbersome and really is not even necessary.  The Port Flow Analyzer is really only using the FlowCom to read pressures, temperatures, barometer and possibly swirl or tumble.  It does not use the FlowCom’s Range settings, leakage #, test pressure or flow direction (except for SF 1020 benches).  Therefore, you do not need to make any changes to the FlowCom during the running of a test.  The program is notifying you of difference between the FlowCom settings and the program settings mostly to explain why the FlowCom’s CFM may not match what the program is calculating.  If the program’s entries and flow bench specs are correct, then the CFM recorded by the program is correct. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Tips using FlowCom, cont: 
Although many FlowCom settings are not critical, the calibrations of the pressure and temperature sensors are critical. Whenever you are recording data, double check that the manometers and dial thermometers are agreeing with the readings in the Port Flow Analyzer program.  Pressures are more critical and should agree within 0.2 “ for Test Pressure and within 1% for Flow Pressure. Temperatures should agree within 3-5 degrees.  If you are noticing difference greater than this, recalibrate your FlowCom following SuperFlow’s recommendations. 
Recording Port Velocity Data 
After you have recorded CFM data at .600 Lift, the program will ask “Record Pitot Tube Velocities for .600 Valve Lift?” (Figure 4.22) because you selected to record Port Velocities at just .600 valve lift in the Test Options menu. Click on Yes and the FlowCom screen and the Main Screen will 

Figure 4.23 Recording Port Velocity (Pitot Tube) Data with FlowCom 
Select which Velocity Point (Port Locations 1­
9) here. When recording, this advances automatically. 
Click here to start or stop recording port velocity readings. 
Press <F1> to record port velocity when you have the pitot tube in the proper port location. 
Port Velocity displayed in black, CFM in gray when recording port velocity. 

Port Locations 1-9 shown in Port Layout diagram and at top of each column. 
Velocities are entered automatically into the Test Data grid. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
be somewhat rearranged to record Port Velocity readings.  See Figure 4.23. 
Position your Pitot tube in each of the 9 port locations indicated on the screen.  While holding the Pitot Tube, press the <F1> key (easier than clicking on RecordVel).  The computer will take 3 readings to average together as the port velocity for that port location.  The average velocity will be loaded into the Test Data grid, and the data point will be advanced to the next location.  When all 9 points have been recorded, the FlowCom screen will be converted back to that used for recording CFM flow. 
Remaining Ports 
Now set up the head and flow bench to flow the exhaust port of #1 cylinder.  Advance to Exhaust Port #1 in the program by closing the FlowCom screen and clicking on the “Exh #1” tab at the top of the Main Screen. The exhaust data pattern remaining from the XFRD185.PTI file is shown.  Measure leakage and then record data with the FlowCom as done for the intake port. 
When you have set and recorded CFM data for .600" lift, then record Pitot tube velocities as done with the intake port. 
Continue flowing the remaining ports using the old data from the  XFRD185.PTI file as the pattern.  
After flowing the entire cylinder head, be sure to save your test file by clicking on File at the top, left of the Main Screen, then clicking on Save.  Reports and graphs as shown in Examples 4.3 and 4.4 are now possible. 
Note: There are many alternate ways to perform this flow test.  For example, flow all the intake ports and then all the  exhaust ports. This example is only one method used to illustrate the Port Flow Analyzer's commands and options. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example 4.3 Analyzing Cylinder Head Performance 
The Port Flow Analyzer provides the user with a number of methods for comparing cylinder head performance, especially the Pro version. Cylinder heads designed to operate on the same engine can be compared as well as cylinder heads from different engine designs.  This example assumes the user has already input the data and two Test Files exist, XCHV600.PTI and XCHVSTK.PTI which come with the Port Flow Analyzer program in the Examples folder.   
Note:  Files XCHV600.PTI and XCHVSTK.PTI have been changed to “Example SB Chevy on SF 600” and “Example SB Chevy Stock” in version 3.5. 
XCHVSTK.PTI is a basically stock head with 1.94/1.50 valves, flowed at 20" test pressure (before porting).  XCHV600.PTI is a test of the same head with major porting and 2.02/1.60 valves installed, flowed at 25" test pressure (after porting). 
At the Main Screen, click on File, then Open (from all saved tests) to open the Flow Test Library.  Open a copy of the XCHVSTK.PTI data from the Examples folder.  The program will return you to the Main Screen. 
Calculated Data Reports 
Select Reports from the Main Screen to obtain the Reports Options menu.  Click on the down arrow key for “Types” of reports to open a list of Report Types.  Before you do comparisons, it may be best to look at a report of Calculated results for 1 head.  Select the Report Type of Int & Exh Calculated Results.  Set the other report options as shown in Figure 4.24. These settings will produce a report of Intake and Exhaust Calculated Data, averaging all ports together, where the intake and exhaust results are both corrected to a test pressure of 25 “. 
Trends to look for in calculated results, in reference to Figure 4.25 include: 
• 
Corr CFM increases as valve Lift increases. 

• 
VlvArea (valve area) increases with valve lift up to a point, then "tops out" at an L/D of .25 (valve lift equal to 1/4 of the valve's diameter).  That is because now the limiting area is the valve throat area which does not increase with valve Lift. 

• 
FlwArea (flow area) increases as CrCFM increases.  The better flowing the head, the higher the FlwArea. 

• 
Flow Coef or Flow Coefficient is an efficiency rating of the 



A Flow Coef of 1.000 indicates the valve and port are very well designed for the size of the valve.  A Flow Coef of .4 to .5 indicates the port and valve have a good amount of untapped potential.  See Section 3.1 on Reports. 
Note: As mentioned in Section 3.1, the setting of Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area in the Preferences menu has a large effect on the VlvArea and Flow Coef calculation.  In these examples,  this spec is set to No to be consistent with the Basic version of Port Flow Analyzer and our Engine Analyzer programs. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

• 
Flow Coef for most all ports is generally highest at low lifts and steadily drops as lift increases to an L/D of .25.  At L/D greater than .25 Flow Coef may start to increase again.  (Occasionally, Flow Coef may drop at very low lifts, L/D less than .05.) 

• 
Since these heads are stock, the somewhat poor Flow Coefs being in the range of .4 to .6 is to be expected and does indicated that there is potential for a large improvement with porting. 

• 
The %E/I should generally be between 60% and 90% for most all lifts.  This head shows a range from 55% to 65% which is somewhat lower than expected. However, remember that this simple calculation does not consider the cam profile, which has a lot to do with what the engine actually “sees”.  See the more accurate % Exh/Int calculation based on cam profile discussed in Section 3.1, page 78 and in Example 4.4. 


Comparison Reports (Pro version only) 
Click on the Report Types menu command shown in Figure 4.25. to open the Report Options menu to select a new Report Type. This time select Compare Tests - CrCFM @Lift. This report will compare the CFM of the Current Test XCHVSTK.PTI with the CFM of another test you can pick from the library at approximately equal valve Lifts (Figure 4.26). 
At the Report Options menu, notice that the Which Cylinders spec is disabled. That’s because comparison reports always compare the Average data for all cylinders.  Intake and Exhaust Test Pressure are being used in the menu for making the report, because all comparison reports correct the data to this Test Pressure to ensure you are making valid comparisons.  In this example, one test was recorded at 20" and one was recorded at 25".  Both tests will be corrected to 25" for the comparison report as shown in Figure 4.26. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.27 Picking a Test File for Comparison 
1) Click on OK to clear this message. 

2) Click on the XCHV600.PTI test file for comparison to highlight it and obtain a Preview. 
3) Then click on Open to Open this file XCHV600.PTI for comparing to the XCHVSTK.PTI test file. 
Click on the Make Report button in the Report Options menu.  You will be shown the Flow Test Library where you can pick the test to compare with the current test.  You highlight XCHV600.PTI and click on the Open button.  See Figure 4.27.   
Figure 4.28 Comparison Report Displayed with Printer Menu 
Click here or here 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
When the report is completed, you are presented with a screen similar to Figure 4.28.  Figure 4.28 also shows the Printer menu, which is obtained by clicking on the Printer menu command or the Printer button..  With options selected in the Printer menu, you will obtain the printed report shown in Figure 4.29. 

NOTE: Version 3.5 has greatly expanded the ability to compare individual ports on one head or between different heads in reports.  Check “Cyl-Cyl Comparison Reports” in Appendix 7. 
V3.5 B also has advanced Head Porter graph features.  See Appendix 9. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Graphs 
One way to check data for possible testing errors or port flow problems is to graph all cylinder's flow data together.  This is done in the small Summary Graph at the Main Screen.  You can also produce a larger version of this graph by clicking on Graph at the top of the Main Screen.  You will open the Graph Options menu shown in Figure 4.30.  Select the Graph Type of Corr Int & Exh CFM, Correct to New Test Pres to No, Which Cylinders to All Cylinders, and Horizontal X Axis to Lift, inches. You should obtain a graph as shown in Figure 4.31. 
Figure 4.31 points out a couple of things: 
• 
Most all port's flow curves are relatively smooth and show CFM always increasing with increasing lift.  This indicates no major errors in entering the data. 

• 
Cylinder #1's intake flows much better than the others intakes, which may be indicating some type of test error.   

• 
First, examine the raw data from cylinder #1.  For example, perhaps an incorrect Leak CFM was entered for this cylinder. 

• 
You may want to repeat this test on cylinder #1.  Perhaps a leak developed during the test, after Leak CFM was measured. 

• 
If you then believe cylinder #1 flows significantly better than the other cylinders, examine #1 intake port.  You may see what makes it better and incorporate that characteristic into the other ports. 

• 
Cylinder #7's exhaust has a sharp bend  at .300" Lift, again indicating a possible test error.  You may want to double check this point. 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Click on Add Test to open the Open Test File screen to add another test to the graph. 
Find the test you want to include in the graph and click on it to highlight it. You may need to search in different Folders. 
After you have clicked on (highlighted) a test, click on the Open button to add it to the graph. 
The Port Flow Analyzer also provides the user with the option of graphing data from 2 different heads on the same graph, called Multiple Tests graphs.  From the Graph Screen, click on Add Graph to obtain the File Open screen for the entire Flow Test Library. Find the XCHV600.PTI test file in the Examples folder and click on it.  This will add this test to the graph.  (In the Pro version, you may also get some additional tests added, which were in the History Log and marked “Yes” to graph.  If this is the case, click on History Log at the top of the Graph screen, and “un-mark” all tests other than XCHV600.PTI and the current test XCHVSTK.PTI for graphing.) 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
You can see that Figure 4.33 looks quite cluttered.  If you click on Graph Type to open the Graph Options menu, you can change the Cylinders to Graph from All Cylinders to Average for Head. This will produce the graph of Figure 4.34, where you can more easily see that both the intake and exhaust of the XCHV600.PTI head flow much better than the XCHVSTK.PTI head.  The exhaust on the modified port flows as well as the intake on the stock port. 
Fig 4.34 Comparison Graph of Current Test XCHVSTK.PTI with XCHV600.PTI, Avg Cylinders 

NOTE: Version 3.5 has greatly expanded the ability to compare individual ports on one head or between different heads in graphs.  Check Appendix 7. 
Engine Graphs (Pro Version Only) 
Another feature in the Pro version of Port Flow Analyzer is the ability to combine the head's flow curve with a cam profile for even more in-depth analysis.  After all, how a head flows at a particular lift is only important for the amount of time the cam holds the valve at that lift.  For example, how a head flows at .700" lift is not important if the cam only lifts the valve to .550" lift. 
First, set the current Engine Specs to match an engine and cam you want to investigate.  Click on Engine at the top of the Main Screen to obtain the Engine Specs menu shown in Figure 4.35.  The Port Flow Analyzer provides several ways to fill in these cam and engine specs.  You can: 
• 
Enter or change any of these specs individually 

• 
Click on the Cam Type combo box and pick an Example Cam to fill in most of the cam specs with one of the hundreds of example cams provided with the program 

• 
Or click on File, then Open Example Engine (provided by Performance Trends) or Open Saved Engine (an engine which you have previously saved). 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

For this example, click on File, then Open Example Engine, then find the X350MOD.PTI engine file and open it. These specs represent a 350 Chevy with 230 duration cam with 105 lobe centers.  Then click on Back (ok) to close the Engine Specs menu and return to the Main Screen. At the Main Screen, click on File, then Save to save the X350MOD.PTI engine specs to the XCHVSTK.PTI test file. 
Next, Open the XCHV600.PTI test file by clicking on File, then Open (from all saved tests) at the Main Screen. Back at the Main Screen, click on Engine to open up the Engine Specs screen for this test file.  Again, open the example engine file X350MOD.PTI, then click on Back (ok) to return to the Main Screen.  Then save this file with these same engine specs. 
Now you know that the 2 heads (test files) you want to compare are combined with the exact same engine specs.  Any difference you see now in engine analysis will be due only to the head differences. 
At the Main Screen, click on Graph, then select the Graph Type of “Int & Exh Flow Area+VlvLift”.  Then click on 
Figure 4.36 Valve Lift and Flow Area Graphs 
The XCHV600.PTI test shows significantly higher Flow Area, especially at higher valve lifts. 
The Legend includes the total Flow Area and Lobe Area for all Flow Area and Valve Lift graphs. See Section 3.1, Engine Performance Estimate report for an explanation of these areas. 
The Valve Lift graphs are directly on top of each other for the 2 tests. This confirms the both test files are using the exact same set of Cam Specs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Notice in the graph legend the numbers labeled IFAr and EFAr. This is the Intake and Exhaust Flow Areas graphed.  These will match the flow areas given in Eng. Performance Estimate reports as discussed in Example 4.4.  Table 4.1 shows a comparison of the 2 heads with this particular cam. 
Table 4.1 Flow Area Comparison of 2 Heads 
Test (head)  XCHVSTK.PTI  XCHV600.PTI  Improvement  
IFAr  224  296  32%  
EF Ar  155  210  35%  
% Exh/Int  69%  71%  2%  

Table 4.1 shows that with this cam, the heads flow 32% better on the intake and 35% better on the exhaust.  The % Exh/Int has also increased from 69% to 71%.  If you did this same comparison with a different cam, the results would be different.  For example, if you specified a larger exhaust cam lobe or rocker arm ratio, the % Exh/Int would increase. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.4 Engine Performance Estimate Report (Pro version only) 
The Pro version of Port Flow Analyzer provides an engine performance prediction function allowing the user to compare cylinder head, camshaft, and other variables on predicted torque, horsepower, idle vacuum, etc.  The Eng. Performance Estimate reports are made at the estimated torque peak and horsepower peak RPMs.  The following example will demonstrate how this predictive feature can be used to evaluate cylinder head and camshaft modifications on engine performance. 
Note:  Performance Trends Engine Analyzer programs (standard and Pro versions) can do much more detailed and accurate estimates of engine performance.  The calculations done in the Port Flow Analyzer are rather simplistic compared to these more detailed programs. 
This example will assume your customer has a 350 Chevy (750 CFM carb, single plane manifold with a mild cam) which sees some drag strip use, but is primarily for the street.  His current heads are the XCHVSTK.PTI heads in the Flow Test Library.  You have just finished installing 2.02/1.60 valves, porting and flowing these heads.  These are the XCHV600.PTI heads in the Test File Library.  You want to estimate a HP potential improvement and determine if the current cam is sufficient. 
At the Main Screen, click on File, then Open (from all saved tests) to open the XCHVSTK.PTI test file from the Examples folder.  Back at the Main Screen, click on Engine to open the Engine Specs menu.  At the Engine Specs menu, click on File, then Open Example Engine to open the X350MLD.PTI engine file.  The program displays the Example Engine Library provided with the program by Performance Trends.  These files represent different engine/camshaft combinations which have been created with the Port Flow Analyzer.  You can also add other combos to a similar library called Saved Engines.  Click on  X350MLD.PTI and then click on 
the Open button.  
The program will return you to the Engine Specs menu so you can see the specs for this file.  Also note that the Current Engine is X350MLD.PTI at the top of this menu.  While reviewing the Engine Specs data file for X350MLD.PTI, you see it is a 4.00 x 3.48 350 CID V-8 with 9.3 compression, and a very mild cam.  (The MLD in X350MLD.PTI stands for mild cam.)  Return to the Main Screen by clicking on Back (ok) at the top left of the menu or pressing the <Exc> key.  (This is very similar to what was done in Example 4.3 to make Engine Graphs.) 
By opening the XCHVSTK.PTI Flow Test and the X350MLD.PTI Engine Specs file, you have basically "installed" the XCHVSTK.PTI heads on the X350MLD.PTI engine. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
At the Main Screen, select the Make Reports option, and pick the Report Type of  Eng. Performance Estimate.  All other Make Reports specs are now disabled as they have no affect on the report.  Click on the Make Report button to make the report. 
The calculated results are displayed on the computer screen, and you can click on the slide bar buttons on the right to display all the results on the screen.  See Figure 4.38.  Figure 4.39 is a printed hardcopy of this report obtained by clicking on the Print command or Printer button at top of the Reports screen.  Important values are summarized in Table 4.2 in Column A.  Major points illustrated by Figure 4.39 include: 
• 
The report indicates a stock torque peak of 376 ft lbs at 3600 RPM and a stock HP peak of 285 HP at 4600 RPM. (These figures may look high, but the Port Flow Analyzer is basically assuming a "race engine" condition.  This is the engine's potential with open race headers, race intake, 29.92 barometer and 60 deg F correction factor, high octane fuel and optimum spark advance, minimum accessories, etc.) 

• 
At the HP peak RPM of 4600, the piston speed is a relatively “low stress” 2668 ft/minute. 

• 
For this low revving engine combination, the program used an intake runner with 1.79" diameter runners on the intake (10" long). This diameter is not necessarily optimum, but is the Avg Port Dia in the XCHVSTK.PTI head specs.  The program chose to use 1.5" headers with 52.2" primaries (as measured from the intake valve).  These are the runner specs which produced the estimated torque and HP.  Much more detailed simulations are available with the Performance Trends line of Engine Analyzer programs. 

• 
The program recommends a much smaller intake port volume of 137 CCs versus the existing 186 CCs.  (This will change with a different selection of cam, or different intake than what the program is assuming, or heads with different flow capabilities.) 

• 
An estimated idle vacuum of 14.6 " Mercury.  Although his engine may actually idle at a different vacuum, this number is useful to judge any change in idle vacuum from changes in head flow or cam specs. 

• 
The total % Exh/Int Flow Area for these heads with this cam is a very acceptable 75.8 %. 


Figure 4.38 Engine Performance Estimate Report 

Click and slide this button down to see all of the report. 

Click here to print report. 
Section describing estimated torque peak. 
Section describing estimate HP peak. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Return to the Main Screen by clicking on Back (ok) and open the XCHV600.PTI flow test file.  Go into the Engine Specs and open the X350MLD.PTI engine file, then click on Back (ok) to return to the Main Screen.  Click on Reports and make another Eng. Performance Estimate report.  These calculations will be for the same short block (Engine Specs) with the new ported heads with larger valves.  A summary of important parameters is given in Table 4.2 in Column B. 
Table 4.2 shows a torque increase of 16 ft lb, and a HP increase of nearly 100 HP.  Although you (the head porter) think this is quite good, the customer seems disappointed.  So you run another report, this time with a bigger cam.   
You return to the Main Screen and go into the Engine Specs menu and open the X350MOD.PTI Example engine file.  This has a much larger, solid cam and slightly higher compression ratio.  You make another Eng. Performance Estimate report, which is summarized in column C in Table 4.2. 
With the cam and compression change, you show the customer the heads have the potential of nearly 500 HP at 6500 RPM. 
However, you caution him that revving the engine to 6500 increases the stress on the rods and pistons.  Piston speed has increased from the stock 2668 at the HP peak to 3770 ft/min.  If he were to rev this new, proposed engine to 6500 or beyond, he will need "race engine" quality internal engine parts. 
Table 4.2 Comparison of Performance Potential of Different Combos 

Heads  XCHVSTK.PTI (A)  XCHV600.PTI (B)  XCHV600.PTI (C)  
Cam/Eng  XCHVMLD.PTI  XCHVMLD.PTI  XCHVMOD.PTI  
Peak Torque  376  392  430  
Peak Tq RPM  3600  4600  5100  
Peak HP  285  378  486  
Peak HP RPM  4600  5400  6500  
Piston Speed  2668  3132  3770  
Rec Int Port CCs  137  161  193  
Idle Vac  14.6  13.0  14.1  
% Exh/Int  75.8  78.8  71.0  

Additional points shown in Table 4.2 include: 
• 
The recommended Intake Port Volume increased with an increase in head flow potential and cam size.  The higher the engine's operating RPM range, the larger the required port volume. 

• 
Idle vacuum dropped about 1.5" with the better flowing XCHV600.PTI heads with larger valves.  However, the X350MOD.PTI engine with higher compression and wider lobe centerlines increased the idle vacuum back to about 14". 

• 
The % Exh/Int flow area remained in an acceptable range of around 75% for all combinations.  The last combo showed only 71.0% which is slightly less than recommended “rule of thumb” 75%.  The X350MOD.PTI cam may require a couple degrees more exhaust duration or higher exhaust rocker arm ratio to obtain the desired 75%.  (If this engine was going to use nitrous oxide or be supercharged, you would want to shoot for 85% Exh/Int.) 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
Assumptions: 
The following paragraphs list some of the major assumptions made by the Port Flow Analyzer.  These assumptions will help you understand the calculations and limitations of the program.  Other assumptions are listed in this manual and can be located through the Index under Assumptions: 
Measurement orifices for custom benches are "sharp edged" orifices whose flow is proportional to the square of the pressure drop (Flow Pressure). 
The flow through the cylinder head's port and valve is proportional to the square of the pressure drop (Test Pressure), similar to a "sharp edged" orifice. 
Eng. Performance Estimates in the Pro version are based on numerous assumptions and should be only used for comparisons.  Your actual engine performance may differ significantly.  The Port Flow Analyzer assumes "race engine" conditions, so its estimates may be higher than your engine.  Performance Trends’ Engine Analyzer programs can provide more accurate estimates of engine performance.  See Example 4.4. 
Accuracy: 
There are many types of calculations being performed by the Port Flow Analyzer.  The accuracy of two major types is discussed below. 
CFM Measurements: 
CFM measurements are based on the process for calculating CFM outlined on page 17 under CFM.  Since the computer’s calculations are the same as calculations done by hand,  you may be surprised to find that the Port Flow Analyzer will probably improve CFM measurements calculated by hand.  These accuracy improvements come from: 
• 
Correcting for small errors in maintaining Test Pressure. 

• 
Reducing "round off" errors. 

• 
Ensuring that all calculations are performed exactly the same way and proper way for each data point. 

• 
Recording data electronically with SuperFlow’s FlowCom (tm) or Performance Trends Electronic Interface can significantly improve accuracy and repeatability (and save time).  One reason is because the Port Flow Analyzer takes several readings to average together for the final, recorded reading.  This improves accuracy, especially for reading “bouncing” manometers.  The electronics also have greater reading resolution, where they can read the difference between 70.1% vs 70.2% Flow Pressure.  The human eye can not see differences that small. 


Although, the procedures listed above (except for those concerning electronics) can all be done with hand calculations, by making these steps automatic and easy, they are more likely to actually happen all the time. 
Any errors in Flow Bench Specs, and Flow Pressure, Test Pressure, Flow Temperature, Test Temperature, Leak CFM measurements (or Test Correction Factor for SF 110 benches) entered into the program will result in errors in CFM calculations. All measurements have small measurement errors associated with them.  The more measurements which enter into a calculation, the more likely chance for significant errors.  However, some measurements are more important than others.  For example, a 5 degree error in temperature is not as important as a 5% error in Flow Pressure.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
In general, the accuracy of production flow benches (with "flowed" measurement orifices) near their maximum flow rate should be within 3% of true CFM. At low flow rates, the accuracy will be worse.  Custom flow benches can give very repeatable numbers.  However, unless they are calibrated carefully, their accuracy is likely to be worse than production flow benches.  See Appendix 2 and Appendix 3 for tips to minimize measurement errors. 
Report of Eng. Performance Potential: 
This report is meant only as a guide to show general trends for various combinations of head flow, cam specs and engine specs. Section 1.3 A Word of Caution, 3.1 Reports and Example 4.4 describe the limitations of these calculations. 
Repeatability: 
The difference between repeatability and accuracy is a concept few people understand. Graphically, accuracy and repeatability is shown in Figure A.1.  Think of the flow bench as an "archer" which is trying to hit the "bulls eye" or the true CFM measurement. Let's say the true CFM was 150 CFM, but one flow bench always comes up with values between 142 to 143 CFM. This flow bench is not very accurate, but is very repeatable (only a 1 CFM spread in data).  Another flow bench comes up with measurements which 
vary from 145 to 155 CFM,  Figure A1  
which average out to the true  Repeatable Measurements   Accurate Measurements 
150 CFM.  This flow bench     produce the same readings, test            produce a reading which is close 
with the 10 CFM spread in     after test, but the reading may            to the true reading, which is a 
data is not nearly as     not be the true CFM.                                     reading other accurate flow 
repeatable as the first, but is  

more accurate. 
Ideally, you want both a repeatable and accurate flow bench, but this is not always possible. When are accurate measurements and repeatable measurements most desirable? 
• 
If you very accurately want to determine if a modification (for example, changing the "short side radius" of a port) has improved the flow, the repeatable flow bench is the one to use. 

• 
If you want flow numbers to use in a magazine article, for other people to compare their flow numbers with, you are better off with the accurate flow bench. 

• 
If you want flow numbers to use in an engine simulation computer program, you are better off with the accurate flow bench. 


The concepts of repeatability and accuracy are further examined in Appendix 3. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 2: Calibrating a Custom Flow Bench 
The Port Flow Analyzer can be configured to work with custom flow benches.  The program works best if the bench measures air flow by measuring the pressure drop across an orifice, like typical SuperFlow benches.  The custom bench can be either Orifice Center like a SuperFlow 300 or 600, of Blower Center like a SuperFlow 110.  See Section 2.0, page 12,  for Orifice Center vs Blower Center flow bench definitions. 
You can also use an air measurement which reads in CFM directly and set the Test Option of CFM Flow to "Enter CFM Directly".  For other types of benches (Pitot tube, laminar air flow, etc), contact Performance Trends for details. 
Manometers 
The manometers to measure pressure are critical for accurate air flow measurements.  Dwyer Instruments (Michigan City, Indiana at 219-879-8000) is a good source if you purchase manometers.  This appendix also discusses "home made" manometers. 
Vertical manometer to measure Test Pressure 
Purchased vertical manometers are usually calibrated in inches of water and can be used directly.  Home made vertical manometers are easy to construct as shown in Figure A.2.  You can use a standard ruler or yardstick if the fluid is water.  Other fluids require different scales.   
Note:  Home made manometers are easy to over-pressure and blow the water out, requiring refilling.  Also, the water can get into your bench causing problems. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Inclined manometer to measure Flow Pressure 
The inclined manometer is not as simple.  Because it is on an angle, you can not use a standard ruler for the scale without some modification.   
You can use a standard Dwyer #244 or #246 manometer calibrated in inches of water.  In the Flow Bench Specs menu, first specify the bench Type is Custom.  Then set up the 3 Bench Specs in the program as follows: 
Dwyer Part #  #244 (0-4")  #246 (0-6")  
Flow Bench Specs for Inclined Flow Manometer:  
Full Scale Reading  4  6  
Full Scale Pressure  4  6  
Linear Scale (like a ruler)  I  I  

If you are using a home made inclined manometer, you must calibrate it as shown in Figure A.3. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Calibrate Custom Bench's Flow Ranges: 
To calibrate the bench, you must make some calibration, sharp-edged orifice plates.  These will be installed where the head is usually installed. Ideally you will make 1 plate close to 85% of the maximum flow for each range, however you may get by with 1 orifice to cover 2 ranges. Use Table A.1 for estimating the size of the orifice needed for each range: 
Table A1: Calibration Orifice Diameter to give about 85% of Full Scale Flow at Specified CFM 
Full Scale CFM  2” water  4” water  6” water  8” water  10” water  12” water  14” water  
50  1.5  1.125  1.125  1.125  1  1  .875  
100  2.125  1.75  1.625  1.5  1.375  1.375  1.25  
150  2.625  2.25  2  1.875  1.75  1.625  1.625  
200  3  2.5  2.25  2.125  2  1.875  1.875  
300  3.625  3.125  2.75  2.625  2.5  2.375  2.25  
400  4.25  3.625  3.25  3  2.875  2.75  2.625  
500  4.75  4  3.625  3.375  3.125  3  2.875  
600  5.25  4.375  4  3.625  3.5  3.375  3.25  
800  6  5  4.625  4.25  4  3.875  3.75  
1000  6.75  5.625  5.125  4.75  4.5  4.25  4.125  
1500  8.25  6.875  6.25  5.875  5.5  5.25  5.125  

For example, assume: 
• 
Your inclined manometer for reading Flow Pres has a Full Scale of 6". 

• 
You estimate that Range #3 will flow 300 CFM at your desired test pressure of 28". 


Table A.1 says you should make a 2.75" diameter orifice plate to calibrate Range 3. 
The process of calibrating each range consists of: 
1. 
Install the orifice plate where the head is installed. 

2. 
Select the range on the bench you want to calibrate and for flow in the Intake direction. 

3. 
Set the test pressure you will set for most of your flow tests, like 28".  This will be recorded on the vertical manometer and is the pressure across the test orifice installed where the head is normally installed. 

4. 
Exactly record all data requested on the following Calibration Test Data sheet. 

5. 
Repeat steps 2-4 for the exhaust direction.  

6. 
Repeat steps 1-5 for all flow ranges on the bench. 


Send the Test Data sheets to Performance Trends with $20 and Performance Trends will return a Calibration sheet with information to load into the Port Flow Analyzer's Bench Specs menu. 
NOTE: Version 3.5 has built in Calibration feature to automatically calibrate custom flow benches and Performance Trends’ EZ Flow system. Check Appendix 7. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Performance Trends' Bench Calibration Test Data Sheet: 
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  
Range  Int/  Test  Flow  Test  Flow  Calibration  Flow  
#  Exh  Pres  Pres  Temp  Temp  Orifice,  Orifice,  
"H2O  "H2O  degF  degF  dia "    dia "  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  
______ _____  ______ ______ ______ ______ ________  ________  

1 Bench flow range # 2 Intake or exhaust direction 3 Vertical manometer reading (reading should be close to standard test pressure, like 28", 25" or 10") 4 Inclined manometer reading.  This must be accurately calibrated in inches of water.  See Figure A.3. 5 Record for Blower Center benches only.  Air temperature at calibration orifice where head is usually installed. 6 Record for Blower Center benches only.  Air temperature at air flow orifices. 7  The diameter of the Calibration Orifice installed where the head is normally installed. 8 If possible, give the number and diameter of the flow orifice(s) inside the bench for this range. 
Send data to Performance Trends with $20 for analysis and Calibrated Full Scale CFM for each range of the bench.  These #s can then be entered into the Bench Specs menu of your program. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 3: Tips for Accurate Flow Testing 
The following notes give tips for improving the accuracy and repeatability of your flow test results: 
CFM measurements from "sharp edged" orifices are not accurate at low flow pressures (Flow Pres).  For example, for a flow manometer calibrated in "Flow %", an eighth inch distance at low flows may be the difference between 20 and 25% Flow.  However, at the high end of the scale, an eighth of an inch is the difference between 98 and 98.5% Flow.  An eighth inch reading error at the low end may result in 5/20 = 25% error.  However at the high end this same reading error would only be .5/98 = 0.5% error.  When possible, select a flow range to keep the Flow Pres at the high end of the manometer scale. 
Since the Leak CFM is usually small, the Flow Pres may be very low on the Flow (inclined) manometer.  Therefore, the Leak CFM measured may not be accurate, and may actually contribute more to an error than neglecting it.  For example, the leakage is actually 2 CFM, but you measure it incorrectly as 5 CFM.  Using 5 as Leak CFM will cause more error in the final CFM calculation than using 0 for Leak CFM. To accurately measure Leak CFM, first minimize all leaks for all your flow tests, but continue to measure Leak CFM.  A Leak CFM which varies more than 2 CFM from port to port may indicate this problem.  If this is the case, you may be better off to always check leakage only to find a major problem, but use the same Leak CFM for all tests. 
Leaks in the pressure lines to the manometers (and electronics) can cause significant errors.  See Figure A.4 for a simple leak check method. 
Temperature readouts on SuperFlow 60, 110 and 120 benches can be checked by noting that the 2 temperatures agree within a couple degrees when the bench has been off for more than 1 hour. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Weather Corrections: 
Weather significantly affects engine power so it seems natural that one should correct port flow for weather changes.  However, engine power depends on the mass of air which flows through it, like lbs/minute.  Weather dramatically affects air density, which affects mass flow. Head flow in CFM is a volume flow, which does not depend on density.   
Minor weather correction, for factors other than air density, have been developed for flow bench results.  Performance 
Trends is still investigating the reliability of these corrections. 
Notes: 
The reason flow benches with air flow measurement orifices require only minor weather corrections, is the cylinder head behaves much like a measurement orifice.  If humidity goes up, both the cylinder head and measurement orifice "see" air with more humidity.  Both restrictions react in the same way to the increased humidity, so measurement errors tend to cancel out. However, when the air passing through the test piece is not the same as that passing through the measurement orifices, errors can occur.  That is why a temperature correction is needed for blower center benches like a SuperFlow 110 bench. 
If an air measurement system other than an orifice is used (laminar air flow element, hot wire anemometer, etc), weather corrections become important.  That is because the air measurement system will not react to weather changes in the same way as the head restriction. 
Performance Trends basically agrees with SuperFlow's analysis of flow bench data, which states that weather corrections 
are not required for most situations. 
Flow Bench Calibration: 
The best check of a flow bench's accuracy and repeatability is to flow one or more calibration orifices of a certain size.  For example, perform a flow test at 10" Test Pressure on a thin steel plate with a 1.5" hole, rather than a cylinder head.  Use the Port Flow Analyzer to obtain an intake and exhaust CFM.  Make all measurements as done for a port, including Leak CFM. 
Now you want to compare the measured flow to what you should obtain.  One way to estimate what CFM you should measure is to flow the orifice plate on a known, accurate flow bench.  Another is to calculate what theoretically should flow through the plate, as shown with the equation below: 
The equation to estimate flow through a sharp edged orifice is: 2
CFM flow = 13.29 x Diameter x
 Test Pressure, " water 
For the example above, with 10" test pressure across a 1.5" hole: 2
CFM flow = 13.29 x 1.5 x
 10 = 95 CFM 
If the bench is operating properly, you should measure very close to 95 CFM.  Some difference between the intake and exhaust CFM should be expected.  However, large differences (15% or more, like the Intake direction measures 90 CFM and the Exhaust direction measures 120 CFM), double check the Flow Bench Specs in the program.  Other possible problems include: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
• 
Leaks in the manometer pressure lines 

• 
Leaks within the flow bench not accurately accounted for when you measure the Leak CFM 

• 
A calibration orifice with a sharp edge on one side and rounded edge on the other.  If you flip the orifice over, and the difference between intake and exhaust reverses, make both edges of the calibration orifice the same. 


Some flow bench manufacturers recommend to use this check to obtain a correction factor for the bench.  For example, if the bench above would measure 90 CFM instead of the expected 95 CFM, you should increase all measurements by 5/90 * 100% or 5.5%. See Section 2.10, page 57 on the Test Correction Factor for correcting Blower Center benches like the SF 110. 
Performance Trends believes that you should not make a significant correction like this based on only one measurement at one flow. Performance Trends does recommend keeping a record of these calibration checks and perhaps using more than one size of orifice.  Only after a long history shows the bench to be consistently off, for example low by 5.5%, should a correction factor be used. 
This version of the Port Flow Analyzer allows for a Test Correction Factor on the SuperFlow 110 and 120 benches only. To make a correction you must changes the CFM flow ratings of all orifices in the Flow Bench Specs.  Also see Appendix 2. 
Here is an Example showing correcting Full Intake Flow, CFM for calibration test data: 
If a good history says the bench reads 135 CFM when it should read 129 CFM, the correction factor would be:
 True CFM x Full Scale CFM = Corrected Full Scale CFM   Measured CFM 
Where: 
• 
True CFM is what you calculate should pass through the calibration orifice 

• 
Measured CFM is a good average over many calibration tests of the CFM the bench actually measures 

• 
Full Scale CFM are the Full Intake or Full Exhaust Flow, both intake and exhaust, currently in the Flow Bench Specs for all orifices used 

• 
Corrected Full Scale CFM are the new flows to enter which should make your calibration tests match the orifices calibration flow, and your flow tests more accurate 


For example, Full Intake Flow for Range #3 is 150 CFM.  Your calibration tests consistently read 135 CFM for a calibration orifice which should flow 129 CFM: 
129 x 150 CFM = 143.3 135 
Change Full Intake Flow for Range #3 to 143.3 in the Bench Specs menu.  Use the same calculation technique to correct all orifice flows in the Flow Bench Specs, both intake and exhaust. 
To check that you have performed the calculations correctly, perform the calibration test again.  You now measure 130 CFM, which is very close to the "True CFM" of 129. Therefore, you did the calculation correctly. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 4 Backing Up Data 
Backing up data means to make more than one copy of the data which can be used or referred to at a later date.  This may be needed in the event one copy becomes lost or erased, or you need room in the Flow Test Library.  Backing up data can take 2 basic forms: 
 Paper Reports Copying files with Windows copy commands 
Other than making Paper Reports, backing up data requires knowledge of Windows File Manager (3.1) or Windows Explorer (95, 98, NT) commands.  Unless you are experienced with Windows commands, have someone experienced with Windows assist you to prevent losing data. 
Paper Reports: 
If you already keep written copies of all flow tests you perform, you already understand this form of backing up data.  When you finish a flow test, simply print out an Int & Exh Raw Flow Data report.  In the Print options menu, be sure to check Include Bench Specs, Include Test Options, Include Head Specs, and (Pro version only) Include Head Details.  This paper report contains nearly all the data you need to reproduce this test in the future.  Simply store this paper report in a safe place.   
Disadvantage of Paper Back Ups: 
For example, say you have accidentally erased a Flow Test File but have a paper report of that data.  If you now want to recalculate that data, correct the data to a new Test Pressure, compare new data to this old data, etc, you must re-enter all that RAW data by hand as if you were running a flow test. 
Copying data to disk with Windows commands: 
This method is the preferred method.  If you are not familiar with Windows commands, have someone help you the first couple of times.  However, this is the most reliable and most efficient way to back up your data.  Note:  Unless stated otherwise, all mouse clicks are with the normal, left button on the mouse. 
To copy Entire PFADAT Folder using Windows 95, 98 or NT, which contains all folders and test files in the Test Library: Click on Start, then Programs, then Windows Explorer (usually at the bottom of the list of programs).  You will obtain the Windows Explorer screen shown in Figure A5. 
Locate the PERFTRNS.PTI folder (may not be printed in capital letters) on the left side of the Windows Explorer screen, usually on the C drive.  Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the PERFTRNS.PTI folder. 
You should now see the PFA30 folder. Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the PFA30 folder. You should now see the PFADAT folder. Right click on the yellow PFADAT folder icon to display the menu of options.  Click on the Copy command to copy this entire folder (all test files in the standard Test File Library). 
NOTE: Version 3.5 has added 1 step Backup and Restore Commands. Check Appendix 7. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A5 Copying Files with Windows 95, 98 or NT Windows Explorer 



Drag slide bar to the top of the list to find your External disk drive (usually A) Right click (with the right mouse button) on the PFADAT folder (not seen here) to open a menu of options Click on Copy to copy the entire contents of the PFADAT folder (the entire test file library).  DO NOT click on Cut. 

Right click on the External drive icon. 
Then click on Paste to paste whatever you copied (in this example, the entire PFADAT folder) to the disk in the External drive. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now you must tell the computer where you want to copy the files to.  Click and drag the slide bar for the left section of the Windows Explorer screen to the top.  (You can also click on the up or down arrow buttons on the slide bar.)  Look for the External Drive icon.  Put a new, formatted disk in the external drive.  Then right click on the External Drive icon, and select Paste from the list of options.  You will see the external drive light come on as the entire PFADAT folder and all its contents are copied to the CD or USB drive.  Label this disk with something like “PFADAT folder, xx/xx/xx” with a name and date. 
Notes: 
If you have so many tests in the Test Library, they may not all fit onto 1 external disk.  Windows Explorer will tell you this and ask you to insert another new, formatted disk.  If this happens, be sure to label all disks with a name, date and sequential #s, and keep the entire disk set together. A suggestion for novice computer users is to make each folder under PFADAT a separate floppy disk. This may require more external disks, but will make it easier to understand restoring just certain folders in the future. 
You may just want to back up one particular folder in the test library (in the PFADAT folder) or just 1 particular test.  You would do this the same as with copying the entire PFADAT folder, just click on the [+] by the PFADAT folder to display the folders under PFADAT.  Then right click on the folder you want to Copy.  To find individual test files, click on the yellow folder icon containing the test file and the contents of the folder will be shown on the right side of the Windows Explorer screen.  Then right click on the test file name and select Copy. 
You can also copy individual test files to the external drive inside the Port Flow Analyzer program.  Open the file you want to copy so it is the current test file.  Then click on File at the top of the Main Screen, then select Copy to External Disk. 
More experienced computer users may want to use the “Backup” features built into Windows 95 and 98 (click on Start, Programs, Accessories, System Tools, Backup).  This compresses test files so it takes fewer external disks.  However you need to use the Backup program to restore test files, which can be more confusing to novice computer users. 
Restoring Data 
Be very careful when restoring data, as you may overwrite Test Files with old, erroneous information. Read all the information below before restoring data.  If you are not familiar with Windows Explorer, have someone more experienced help you. 
The ONLY reason to restore data is if you have lost test files. This could be because you mistakenly erased it,  you had a major computer failure, or you are moving the program to another computer. Do NOT restore data unless you have one of these problems, as you could possible create many more problems than you are trying to fix. 
When restoring test files and folders, you pretty much reverse the procedure for backing up.  First you  put your backed up external disk in the external drive.  Then open Windows Explorer, find the External drive icon and click on it to display its contents.  Right click on the folder you want to restore and select Copy. 
Now find the PFADAT folder under PFA30 under PERFTRNS.PTI, usually on the C: drive.  Right click on the folder 
1 level up from the folder you are restoring.  For example, if you are restoring the test file folder CHEV which was in the PFADAT folder, you must click on the PFADAT folder. If you are restoring the entire Test Library folder PFADAT, you must click on the PFA30 folder. If you are restoring the test file 194-150 which was in the CHEV folder under the PFADAT folder, you must click on the CHEV folder. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
During the restoring (copying) process, Windows Explorer checks to see if it is overwriting an existing file (Figure A6).  If it is, it will ask you if the existing file or folder should be overwritten.  Be very careful when overwriting files, as you may overwrite a new test file with data from an old test file of the same name.   
Before restoring test files, it is good practice to back up all test files first.  Then if you make a mistake, and overwrite test files you didn’t mean to, you have your backup copies to restore the test files from. 

NOTE: Version 3.5 has added 1 step Backup and Restore Commands. Check Appendix 7. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 5: Performance Trends “Black Box II” Interface 
For information on SuperFlow’s FlowCom refer to SuperFlow’s instructions, Section 2.11 and Example 4.2.  This section does cover calibrating a Swirl or Tumble Meter which can be read through SuperFlow’s FlowCom.  If you are using either Performance Trends’ “Black Box”  (released in 2002) or earlier “Electronic Interface”, also take a look at Section 2.11 and 
Example 4.2.   
Black Box 
Performance Trends’ “Black Box” data logger will record data from your flow bench to greatly enhance your flow bench testing.  The two figures below give an explanation of the various connections to the Black Box, and how it hooks up to a typical SF 600 or 300 or custom style flow bench. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
After you hook up the Black Box, you must calibrate following the procedure later in this section. 
You must specify that you are using a Black Box Type of Electronics in the Port Flow Analyzer as shown in the menu to the right.  You must also click on the “See Details (calibrations)” button to calibrate the sensors to match the manometers on your bench.  See Page 41. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Electronic Interface 
The front panel of Performance Trends Electronic Interface has only a power switch and power light indicator in the switch.  When the interface is communicating correctly with the computer, you will see the power light flash. 
Figure A.7 shows the back panel of the Electronic Interface with its connectors, options and hose routing.  Section 2.11 discusses the commands and options for the interface.  Section 2.6 discusses the settings for the interface in the Bench Specs menu. 

Figure A.8 shows the routing and installation of the optional thermocouples (T/Cs) used for Blower Center (SuperFlow 110) flow benches. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Sensor Calibration: 
For accurate readings, the Electronic Interface must first be calibrated to match your bench's sensors.  Calibration consists of applying known pressures, temperatures, etc to the sensors and telling the computer what the known pressures, temperatures, etc are. 
To run the calibration procedure, you first must have the interface installed and operating, and the Flow Bench Specs set correctly.  Then click on the See Details button at the bottom of the Flow Bench Specs menu.  See Figure A9.  You will bring up the Calibrations screen shown in Figure A10. 
There are 2 basic ways to calibrate a sensor: 
1. 
You can type in calibration settings (Offset and Factor) that you have gotten from Performance Trends or from previous settings you have written down. 

2. 
You can go through the calibration procedure. 


Most of the time you will go through an actual calibration procedure.  To calibrate, first select which sensor you wish to calibrate, and click on the Calibrate Offset & Factor button.  The program will bring up the Electronics Data screen discussed in Section 2.11.  After a slight pause, start following the instructions given in the program.  The instructions will follow the following basic procedure: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
1. 
The computer will first asks you to apply a known input to the sensor, usually giving you tips on how to do this.  For pressure sensors, this is zero pressure to the manometer and interface at the same time.  This is most easily done by turning off the flow bench and letting all pressures settle out for 30 seconds or more.  You are now getting 0 pressure to the sensors and the manometer.  This is also a good time to reset the zero on the fluid manometer.  For Swirl or Tumble, turning the bench Off is also a good way to set 0.  Verify 0 by watching the swirl meter readout.  For temperatures, you 

will set some known temperature, like room temperature with the bench off, and read the exact temperature off the dial thermometers on the bench. 

2. 
Tell the computer you have set this first condition by clicking on OK on the computer screen.  The computer will read the sensor signal.  For temperatures, the computer will ask you to type in this first temperature reading. 

3. 
The computer asks you to apply a constant known signal to the sensor, different than the first.  The program usually gives you tips on how to do this.  For pressure sensors, this is most easily done by turning on the flow bench with a head installed with a valve lift which gives smooth, steady flow.  Adjust the bench to give a manometer reading in the range requested by the program.  For Swirl or Tumble, this method also works if you have the swirl or tumble meter installed with a head giving good, steady tumble or swirl.  For temperature, the bench will create heat, especially if you flow in the direction suggested by the program. 

4. 
Tell the computer you have set this second condition by clicking on OK on the computer screen.  The computer will read the sensor signal and then ask you to type in this second reading.  For pressures, you will read the manometers as well as you can while  the computer was making its readings.  For swirl or tumble, you will read the digital display.  For temperature, you will read the dial thermometers on the bench. 

5. 
The program will show you some information about the new calibration Offset and Factor, and let you decide if you want to use them.  If you answer Yes, they will be loaded back into the Calibrations menu. 



Verify your calibrations are accurate when running a test by seeing if the program’s data display match the bench’s sensors. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Pressure sensors can drift somewhat with time or temperature changes.  If the program’s pressure readings do not read 0.0 when the bench is off, you may be able to use the “Re-zero” command instead of completely recalibrating.  See Section 2.11 for details. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 6: New Features in V 3.0 E 
During the 3 years version 3.0 has been available, several minor bugs have been fixed and several new features added.  Listed below are some of the main new features in Version 3.0 E.  Minor bug fixes are not listed, but are available in the more detailed Readme.doc file available from inside the program. 
• 
You can now jump got the Performance Trends website directly from the program under Help at the main screen. 

• 
You can now view the User’s Manual directly from the program under Help at the main screen. 

• 
Program now reads Performance Trends’ new, very affordable Black Box electronic data logger (interface).  Black box can read flow pressure, test pressure, pitot tube port velocity, test temp, flow temp, swirl, flow direction and an input from a switch to record data.  See Appendix 5. 

• 
Several new Edit options are available.  Now you can click on the top of the Lift or L/D column on the main screen to generate valve Lifts or L/Ds based on the settings in the Test Options screen.  See details below. 

• 
Using a new comp hardware number for unlocking the program, to hopefully be more stable.  NOTE that this version will require a different unlock # than previous versions. 

• 
Added feature to increment test pressure instead of valve lift  This is a method used for testing devices without various valve lifts, like mufflers, air cleaners, air meters, turbo components, etc.  Pro version only.    See details below. 

• 
Added several features to allow program to direct FlowCom to set the Test Pressure for tests which vary test pressure (not valve lift). Three new Preferences allow you to 1) allow varying test pressure, 2) have the program set Test Pressure at each new point, and 3) have the program automatically increment through all test pressures, basically automating the test after you manually record data for the first point.  Pro version only.    See details below. 

• 
Added several features to allow you to rename, add, delete and copy folders from the Open menu. 

• 
Now allow calibration pressure input for 1020 benches (typically 25 or 50 inches of water).  Previously it was assumed 50” for all SF 1020 benches. 

• 
Fixed a bug where the FlowCom’s barometer could be read incorrectly by the program as a small, negative number.  

• 
Added features to check and allow for Com Port #s up to 6. 

• 
Added F5, F6, F8, F9 “hot keys” to the main screen and FlowCom screen so you can navigate easier through many screens: 

• 
F5 Go to FlowCom or Electronics screen when at main screen. 

• 
F6 Go to Comments section when at main screen. 

• 
F8 go down one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #2.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
F9 go up one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #3.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
Esc key to close the FlowCom or Electronics screen and return to main screen. 



• 
Now allow up to 50 lines of printed comments.  This was previously limited to 20 lines of comments. 

• 
Greatly enhanced the ability of the program to read SuperFlow FlowComs with a wide variety of different computers and different generations of FlowComs. 

• 
Added a Browse button to the network folder option in Preferences menu.  See Appendix 8 for details. 

• 
Added Tabs to preferences screen to better organize preferences. 

• 
Improved print quality of most all screens and printed reports. 

• 
Add preference for using either Head # (original version) or now File Name for the default Graph Title. 

• 
Added Swirl Analysis report to calculated Estimated swirl torque in Tq, oz in and Newton mm.  Pro version only. 

• 
Allow Raw Report to be corrected to different Test Pressures. 

• 
Allow Importing of Flow Pro FP and FP3 files, and some Winflow files, files from other types of flow bench programs.  Pro version only. 

• 
Added explanation of what Temperature is recorded in a 1020 bench. (It is not air flow temperature unless you have made provisions to record air temperature in your 1020.) 

• 
Program is now 32 bit, which means: It can use long file names. It should be more compatible with USB printers. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
• 
Program now uses a faster method of reading the FlowCom.  This method also proved more reliable on the new, very fast computers. 

• 
Replaced the graph option of Swirl Stab with Swirl (abs) to graph absolute value of swirl.  This graphs all swirl numbers as a positive number so you can see RPM, but not direction.  Pro version only.  

• 
Corrected a problem where data other than CFM (like swirl) would not always be graphed or reported correctly if the valve lifts were not in order or similar for different ports. 

• 
Correct problem where opening 'Tip' would always show again, even if you selected to not see it again. 

• 
Added Mass Flow calculations to graphs and reports for English units.  Pro version only.    See details below. 

• 
Added Option in FlowCom screen to ReZero Swirl/Tumble. 

• 
Allowed Foot or Hand Switch to signal to record data.  The user must 'double click' the switch in the current version. 

• 
Fixed a bug where the air temperature recorded by a 1020 bench was not being reported correctly in Reports. 

• 
Added a Note Tip that the air temperature recorded by a 1020 bench is "motor box"  temperature and not true air temp of the air flow stream. 

• 
Fixed a bug where printouts for head comparison reports were not complete if you requested a comparison of individual cylinders.  Pro version only. 

• 
Fixed several things to calculate Velocities, Gs, Piston Pos, FlowCoef, etc for Metric Units.   

• 
Added ability from the File menu (upper left corner of main screen) to Save To or Open From a external disk.  This makes it easier to copy files from one computer to another. 

• 
Added ability to read Cam Files in Engine Specs.  Now you can combine detailed Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, S96, Andrews, etc cam files with flow bench data for more detailed analysis.  Pro version only.    See details below. 

• 
Added several engine analysis graphs like Psuedo Flow Velocity,  Piston Velocity, Piston Acceleration and Piston Position.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Main and graph screen now fills screen for larger resolution screens like 600x800 and larger. 

• 
Data tables included with graph were not using 'Alternate Names' which you had entered manually.  Pro version only. 

• 
Added feature to allow comparison reports between individual cylinders of different heads in the Pro version.  In the Reports Options screen, pick one of the Compare Report Types.  Then select one of the individual cylinders for Which Cylinder.  Then when you pick the test from the library for comparison, you are also asked which cylinder to compare to the cylinder of the first (current) test. 

• 
Fixed bug where Filter feature did not correctly find Test Dates.  Pro version only. 

• 
Fixed bug where Filtering Files = On did not allow head and engine files to be displayed in the Open File screen.  Pro version only. 

• 
Added ability to allow L/D increments to be graphed'and reported for port velocity measurements.  Pro version only.  

• 
Added ability to run JKM style flow bench.. 

• 
Fixed bug where arrow keys in Test Options erased Int and Exh port adapters if they were entered by hand. 

• 
Fixed bug where basic version could print Head Details and Engine specs in report printouts. 

• 
Put User Name at top of Report Printouts, moved Perf.Trends (C) to 3rd line. 

• 
Now allow 32 graph lines to be graphed at 1 time, which allows 2 8 cyl heads or 4 4 cyl heads to be graphed at once. 

• 
When Entering CFM Directly, the Test Pres Column has been eliminated.  The test pressure for the CFM data is now set as the Test Pressure in the Test Options menu.  This change eliminates a possible problem when Test Options Test Pres does not match Test Pres in the Data Grid column. 

• 
Fixed a problem in that not all the CFM data was being requested when you printed a Blank Worksheet. 

• 
Added a Preference to not require a Head # for a New Test.  Pro version only. 

• 
Now prints cursor line on graphs when printed. 

• 
Added a Preference to hide barometer in FlowCom screen. 

• 
Added 9 new report options for Pro version, mostly either asking for Int only or Exh only, and new Cyl-Cyl Comparison with cylinder CFM averages included.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added option to 'Hide' individual graph lines by right clicking on their name in the Legend on the right side of the graph. Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added new button in Preferences called 'Set Graph Colors' where you can manually set the colors of individual graph lines. 

• 
Program now reads some types of WinFlow files (mostly SF 600). Just 'click on' them (either the .PWD, .DAT or .FTD files) in the 'Open Test File' screen and follow the program directions.  Pro version only. 

• 
Added a Preference to disable valve spring specs from being automatically updated (calculated) from other valve spring inputs.  Pro version only. 

• 
Fixed bug where Head # was not always updated after being changed in the Head Specs menu.  Pro version only. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Complete List of Types of Reports, Many Are New 
Int & Exh Raw Flow Data  Int & Exh Cyl-Cyl Comparisn  Int & Exh Calculated Data  
Int & Exh Other Calc Data        Eng. Performance Estimate   Meas Int & Exh VelData  
Compare Heads - CrCFM @Lift  Compare Heads - VArea @Lift   Compare Heads - FArea @Lift  
Compare Heads – FlCf @ Lift  Compare Heads - VVel @ Lift   Compare Heads - PVel @ Lift  
Compare Heads - CrCFM @ L/D  Compare Heads - VArea @ L/D   Compare Heads - FArea @ L/D  
Compare Heads – FlCf @ L/D  Compare Heads - VVel @ L/D  Compare Heads - PVel @ L/D  
Int Raw Flow Data  Int Cyl-Cyl Comparisn  Int Calculated Data        
Int Other Calc Data        Exh Raw Flow Data  Exh Cyl-Cyl Comparisn   
Exh Calculated Data  Exh Other Calc Data   Int & Exh Cyl-Cyl Comp +Avg   
Int Mass Flow  Exh Mass Flow  Int & Exh Mass Flow  
Calc. Int Swirl Analysis  

Complete List of Types of Graphs, Many Are New 
Corr Int & Exh CFM   Corr Int CFM  Corr Exh CFM  
Calc Int Velocities  Calc Exh Velocities  Intake Swirl  
Int Swirl (abs)   Intake Tumble  Int Tumble Stab  
Int & Exh Flow Coef  Int Flow Coef   Exh Flow Coef  
% Exh/Int  Int Stablty  Exh Stablty  
Int & Exh Stablty  Int & Exh Flow+Valve Area  Int Flow + Valve Area  
Exh Flow + Valve Area  Int & Exh Flow Area+VlvLift  Int Flow Area + Valve Lift  
Exh Flow Area + Valve Lift  Overlap Flow + Valve Area  Overlap Flow + Valve Lift  
Meas Int Vel (port map)  Meas Exh Vel (port map)   Psuedo Flow Velocity,ft/sec   
Psuedo Flow Velocity, Mach#  Piston Velocity, ft/sec   Piston Velocity, ft/min  
Piston Acceleration, Gs  Piston Depth from TDC, in   Int Mass Flow Lb/Min  
Int STP Mass Flow Lb/Min  Exh Mass Flow Lb/Min  Exh STP Mass Flow Lb/Min  
Int & Exh Mass Flow Lb/Min  Int & Exh STP MsFlw Lb/Min   Int Mass Flow Gm/sec  
Int STP Mass Flow Gm/sec  Exh Mass Flow Gm/sec   Exh STP Mass Flow Gm/sec  
Int & Exh Mass Flow Gm/sec  Int & Exh STP MsFlw Gm/sec  

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A13 Edit Options 

Hot Keys for Data Recording (see figure A14 below): 
• 
F5 Go to FlowCom or Electronics screen when at main screen. 

• 
F6 Go to Comments section when at main screen. 

• 
F8 go down one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #2.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
F9 go up one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #3.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
Esc key to close the FlowCom or Electronics screen and return to main screen. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples (C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Psuedo (false) Flow Velocity in Figure A15 is the calculated INCOMPRESSIBLE velocity of the air as it passes through the valve.  Some engine builders like to look at these numbers as they make changes to the head flow, cam profile, rod length, etc. HOWEVER, this is NOT the TRUE air speed, because air can compresses and expand, and its density changes with temperature.  True air speed and tuning details ARE calculated in the Engine Analyzer Pro, which gives a much more realistic idea of what is actually happening. 
Running Tests Where Test Pressure is Changing 
Rather that recording CFM flow data at different valve lifts, you can now choose to test a component at different Test Pressures. This is a method used for testing devices without various valve lifts, like mufflers, air cleaners, air meters, turbo components, etc. 
Setup the Preferences menu for the appropriate options by clicking on Preferences at the top of the Main Screen.  See Figure A16. 
Allow Test Pressure Set Points must be set to Yes.  Automatically Set Test Pressure means you want the Port Flow Analyzer to set the test pressure for each new set point.  This will only work if you have a motor controller.  You may want this turned off if you encounter problems with having the program setting Test Pressure automatically. 
If you want the program to automatically step to the next row with a Set Test Pressure, Choose one of the “Yes” options for “Auto Step Through Test”.  These also let you set the approximate amount of time to stabilize between points. 

Choose the 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now you will proceed as with any other type of test, except you (or the Port Flow Analyzer software) will set the test pressure at each different row (test point) to a different number in the “Set Pres” column.  The program will record the actual test pressure (typically quite close to the Set Pres in the “Test Pres” column, and correct the CFM to what it would have been if you had obtained the exact Set Pres. 

If you set the Preference “Auto Step Through Test” to one of the “Yes” options, the program will automatically step to the next row, set the test pressure via the SuperFlow’s Motor Controller through the FlowCom and wait the selected amount of time.  Then the program will automatically record the data and step to the next row.  For this procedure to work best, you should start at the first row. The sequence is started when you press <F1> or click on the Record menu item.  When all rows with a “Set Pres” have been set and recorded, the focus should return to the first row and auto-stepping will stop. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 7: New Features in V 3.5 
Port Flow Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v3.0 for Windows. These include 
3.0 A through v3.0 E and now v3.5.  Here is a brief listing of some of the features new since v3.0 E was released, including Version 3.5.  Unless stated, most all of these new features apply Only to the Pro Version of the software: 
New Features: 
• 
The program now has an “EZ Start Wizard” to walk beginners through the steps of starting a new test.  (Fig A20)  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program will automatically look for old v3.0 files and copy them over to this new v3.5. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added several features for emailing graphs, files and PDF reports (if you have the full Adobe Acrobat ™).  (Fig A21) 

• 
Program now has a 'Website' button in the About screen for jumping to www.performancetrends.com website. 

• 
New Preference for Blue and Red text colors in data entry grid on main screen, to better remind user of Intake versus Exhaust data.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Increased the number of possible data points (rows of data) up to 55.  This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
Program now has added a new 'Edit' menu with several Edit options for the Main Screen.  (Fig A22) This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
Program now has added Backup and Restore commands under File at the main screen.  (Fig A22)  This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
Program now has added ability to read WinFlow files from SF 1020 bench, in addition to an SF 600.   

• 
You can now resize the Electronics and FlowCom Recording screen to display these readouts to fill the entire screen, if needed. (Fig A33) This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
The program now warns if you pick an Alternate Folder for Saving in Preferences if the path includes "\PFADAT".  You should be picking the folder which contains the folder "\PFADAT". 

• 
In Head Details screen, the program would not correctly calculating Area or Width and Height for an Oval port. The program assumes Oval if the Width and Height are not the same and "Round" is the port shape described in the Head specs. 

• 
The main screen now displays better for screen resolutions greater than 600 x 800. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
The screen colors are now more compatible with Windows XP. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added a new Port Velocity mode in test options, where you can record 1 pitot tube pressure at every test point.  A new Preference called "Prompt for Recording Single Vel. Pt." was also added to let the program Prompt you for recording a single Pitot Tube velocity reading after you record the CFM readings.  Set this to No and the program records all data AND Pitot Tube velocity at the same time.  Set this to Yes, and the program records all CFM data EXCEPT velocity, then displays a message "Now Record Velocity with <F1>" for about about 1 second, then when you press <F1> again, just the velocity reading is taken.  This data is contained in a data column called “Vel #1”.  This data is graphed vs Lift or L/D if you select to graph a Port Velocity Map, and is included in Report Types of “Raw Data” and “Calculated Data”.  (Fig A23) 

• 
You can save a picture file (like a jpg file) at each lift point, like recording flow patterns with wet flow benches.  (Fig A23) 

• 
You can now search (Filter tests) for certain characters or phrases in the test File Name, in addition to comments, spec settings flow results as available in v3.0. 

• 
Now when you click on a graphed point on the main screen, the row for that data point gets highlighted in the table of results. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program now better remembers the printer type and printer page orientation when you make changes to the Windows Printer Setup.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program now has new preference to let you pick a Company Logo graphics file to appear in your printouts.  The logo prints out in Graph printouts also.  (Fig A25) 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
• Updated the routine to locate an appropriate version of Adobe Acrobat ™ to view the PDF  files for the user manual.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 
New Outputs (Features for Graphs and Reports): 
• Added several new features for doing Cylinder to Cylinder comparison reports.  (Fig A24)  When you choose a 'Cyl-Cyl' report type, three new options appear: 
1. 
Whether to include additional Tests or Heads in the report.  This allows you to compare cylinders from different tests or heads on the same report. 

2. 
Whether to include a difference column to show the difference in the first Column of CFM to all the rest.  This first column could be a single cylinder or the average for the first head. 

3. 
Whether to include averages of the columns at the bottom of each column.  This would be like the average CFM flow at all lifts for each cylinder. 


• 
Program now has added ability to specify which Ports to Graph and/or Report with a new 'Pick' option for Which Cylinders in the 'Graph' and 'Report' Options screens.  (Fig A24) 

• 
Columns in History Log have been slightly rearranged, and columns now include Which Cylinders, which are the cylinders to Report or Graph if you choose the 'Pick' option.  (Fig A24) 

• 
New Format option to Open/Save/Edit a particular graph format.  This allows you to save the graph type, test pressure corrections, graph scales, etc to a particular name.  Then you can easily Open these saved formats to reproduce a graph format in the future.  This is available by clicking on Format, then Open/Save/Edit Graph Format.  (Fig A26) 

• 
User Specified Colors now include colors for Port Velocity Maps.  Click on Preferences, then Set Graph Colors on the right side, then at the bottom right of the Graph Colors screen are the color choices for the Port Velocity Maps. 

• 
Made several changes so Port Velocity maps would show up better on various computer screen resolutions.   

• 
Added several new features for writing ASCII files from reports.  (Fig A29) 


1. 
Report names can now include the path. 

2. 
Now you can browse to find or create a file name and path for writing the ASCII file. 

3. 
ASCII reports can now include comments and all test specifications in the output. 

4. 
Program now remembers ASCII file settings. 


• 
Program now has added several additional graph styles under format, then Line Style.  These include bar graphs, 3D bar graphs, area graphs, etc.  (Fig A27) 

• 
Program now has added "3D-Graphs.clc" calc screen to let user change view and other specs about 3D graphs.  (Fig A28) 

• 
When opening a WinFlow data file, the program now lets you pick the Comments file for this WinFlow file, so those comments can be imported also. 

• 
The Preference which allows you to choose a default External/CD drive has been expanded to include letter drives from A to Z.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Changed Preference for Dot Matrix Graph Printer Adjustment to "Graph Printer Adjustment For..." and now have "Acrobat" as a choice. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Put in checks for blank choices in Graph and Report menus.  Blank entries are automatically set to the first choice in the 'Drop Down'. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Made graph line flash rate independent of computer speed (.2 second flash rate). This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Print B&W now draws graph as B&W on screen for better printing on color printers when B&W has been requested. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program now prints headers of graphs and reports the same, and modifies the spacing to better ensure that long test file names are printed completely.  As mentioned earlier, you can also include a company logo graphic image. 

• 
A new option has been added so reports can be printed WITHOUT the Flow Data.  This allows you to print, for example, just the Head Specs and Head Details with nothing else. This feature is in the Basic version also. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
New Features for Various Flow Benches and Electronics: 
• 
Added some new Flow Bench types and/or features to be more compatible with the following types of Flow Benches. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Performance Trends’ EZ Flow system.  (Fig A32) 

• 
SuperFlow 

• 
FMA Flow Benches from Australia 

• 
Saenz Flow Bench 

• 
Performance Flow and JKM style benches (using Pitot Tubes to record CFM flow) 

• 
Several styles of custom or “do it yourself” flow benches. 

• 
Program now will control Performance Trends’ automatic Valve Opener.  Note:  You will be given a new unlock number for your program to open up the Valve Opener menu option in the Flow Bench specs.  (Fig A30) 

• 
Program is compatible with SuperFlow's ™ new USB FlowCom. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added 3 new Preferences for Pro version only, which allows for there to be both an Intake and Exhaust Test Correction.  A Test Correction is obtained by flowing a known orifice where the head would go on your flow bench.  Knowing the difference between what IS measured and what SHOULD BE measured, a correction is obtained, to put your bench back in Calibration. Now you can do this both in the standard Intake direction AND exhaust direction.  The Preferences menu now contains places for you to enter the expected flow for both the intake and exhaust direction.  Previously, the program used the Superflow SF110 bench standard of 153.2 CFM. 

• 
Program now has added ability to permanently save some debugging settings in the 'Flow Com' or 'Electronics' screen if these debugging settings are fixing a problem.  Click on Options, then the 'Save..' or 'Unsave...' options. 

• 
Program now has added option if FlowCom screen to force FlowCom to change the range of the flow bench.   

• 
If requested Range in Bench Specs is blank, the program now assigns range 1 both in the FlowCom Screen and in the Main Screen grid (spreadsheet). 

• 
Added Calibrate Range screen in Bench Specs for Custom Bench or Performance Trends’ EZ Flow Type flow bench.  By installing and flowing known sharp edged orifices, you can calibrate your bench to match the CFM results of other production flow benches, like a SuperFLow ™ bench.  (Fig A31) 

• 
Program now does more extensive of valid com ports for communicating to a FlowCom or Performance Trends Black Box and Black Box II.  It checks up to Com Port 20, and gives better suggestions at valid ports.  There is also a “Find” button in the Flow Bench specs screen to find your electronics by checking all available Com Ports. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Expanded some allowable ranges for SF300 and SF600 to cover ranges requested by some customers.  Opened up acceptable limits for flow ranges for Custom Bench to 10-5000 CFM. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
New Preference allows you to increase the allowable test and flow pressure inputs up to 1000 each. 

• 
Program now allows printing of Calibrations screen. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Rearranged Troubleshooting options in FlowCom/Electronics screen to be under Help.  This allows more room for features to be listed under Options. This feature is in the Basic version also. 


New Features Specific to the Black Box II: 
• 
Program now has added option for Recording Switch for Black Box II.  Click on Options in the Electronics screen, then Foot Switch Enabled to turn on this option.  Then click on Options in the Electronics screen again, BB2 Foot Switch, then pick which Temperature channel to have the switch come in on.  The Black Box II can read both temperature and the foot switch from the 4 pin analog inputs on its side. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added 2 new Troubleshooting Options, of Test Com Ports and Check Boot Message. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Made major change to EZ Flow flow bench calibration to work with new Black Box II.  (Fig A32)  This feature is in the Basic version also. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
• 
Program now does better checks for bad data from Black Box II.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added new option for Preference of 'Black Box Reads +/- Pressure' but the program does no checks to see if the direction of the flow is correct for the type of port, intake and exhaust.  Setting “Black Box Reads +/- Pressure” means a custom bench does not need valves to maintain the high pressure side of the manometer to remain the high pressure side of the manometer when you switch from the Intake to the Exhaust flow direction.  This greatly simplifies the design of “do it yourself” and custom benches. 

• 
Fixed bug where if the program is set to 'Black Box Reads +/- Pressure', CFM was being displayed even if the Vertical Manometer reading was less than 2" water. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added Preference for Barometer sensor in Black Box II.  To get Barometer reading with Black Box II, you must turn on the Preference "Black Box II has Baro Sensor" and also ask to record Barometer in the Test Conditions screen. You can also adjust the Barometer reading slightly with the Weather Calibration section in the Calibrations screen available by clicking on the Calibrations button at the lower left corner of the Flow Bench Specs screen.  The Barometer input in this screen will offset the Black Box's barometer reading.  For example, enter -.25 and the Black Box's Barometer will be reduced by .25 inches of Mercury. 

• 
Program now has added checks for Black Box or EZ Flow systems to watch for over-ranging the pressure sensors, producing inaccurate data. For example, if a pressure sensor is “maxed out”, the program tells you this, rather than letting you think this data point is accurate. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Fixed a bug where the Black Box could read test pressure incorrectly for certain faster computers. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added a Preference to Eliminate program looking for Black Box set up for + or – pressure. 


New Engine Performance Report Features (Pro Version Only): 
• 
Program now comes with almost 1000 more example cam profiles built in, including almost the entire Crane catalog. 

• 
Program now offers to fill in blank Engine Specs. 

• 
Program now allows for Rocker Arm Ratios of less than 1, down to .7 

• 
Fixed a bug where if you chose a different Cam Advance in the Engine Specs screen, it would blank out and revert back to straight up. 

• 
Fixed a bug where if you chose something other that .050" events in the Engine Specs screen (.040" or seat timing), the program would always open up the Engine Specs screen with .050" as the labels for cam events. 

• 
Fixed bug where VERY high runner velocities (small ports) could erroneously produce good HP. 

• 
Engine Performance Estimate report now uses Metric Units if Metric units are chosen in Preferences. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 





Figure A25 Print Options and History Log for Printing Report from Figure A24 
In Preferences, set text to be included in Printouts. 
Use Browse button to find your graphics file on this computer. 
Graphics file is drawn here on printed reports. 
In History Log, put a Yes in the “Report” column for tests you want to include in this report. 
Click in the “Cyls to Report” to assign which cylinders to include in the “Cyl-Cyl Comparison” report. 
Two lines of text from Preferences is printed here in printouts. 
Cyl-Cyl Comparison Head Summaries is given here. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 








Appendix 8: Sharing Data Files on a Hub (network) 
Assume you want to share your Port Flow Analyzer files on 2 different computers, one called the Shop Computer and one called the Office Computer.  We will assume that the Office computer is where you want all the new files you create to be stored.   
This is the procedure to follow: 
1. 
Install and activate the Port Flow Analyzer on both computers. 

2. 
Using Windows Explorer, set up the Port Flow Analyzer folder (PFA) on the Office computer to be shared.  Usually this is done by right clicking on the “Port Flow Analyzer v3.5” folder (usually under the “Performance Trends” folder under the “Program Files” folder on the C drive) and selecting the Sharing option.  If you don’t see Sharing, click on Start, then Help and look for help on Sharing Resources. 

3. 
In the PFA program in the Shop Computer, set the Preference to Yes for Use Alternate File Location.  Then click on the Browse button and find the path to the Mapped drive from the Office Computer.  

4. 
Now, when both computers are running, all your flow files, engine and head spec files, etc are being opened from and saved to the Office Computer, both for the Port Flow Analyzer program on either the Office Computer or the Shop Computer. 



(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 9: New Features in v3.5 B 
Port Flow Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v3.0 for Windows. These include 
3.0 A through v3.0 E, v3.5 and now v3.5 B. For the features added to the v3.5, refer to the Readme.doc file (click on Help, then Display Readme.doc File) in the program.  Listed here are features introduced in v3.5 B.  Also, v3.5 B has a more advanced version we call “Head Porter”. So now there are 3 versions of Port Flow Analyzer: 
• 
Basic Version 

• 
Professional (Pro) Version (includes all Basic features and more advanced Pro features) 

• 
Head Porter Version (includes all Professional features and more advanced Head Porter features) Here is a listing of the major enhancements and new features for v3.5 B. 


Data Recording: 
In Test Options, you can now select to record port velocity data at 3 depths in the port.  See Figure A41, 47.  Head Porter only. 
Several enhancements to Port Velocity Report for Head Porter version have been added, to allow more averaging for all possible combinations of recording port velocity.  See Figure A42.  Head Porter only. 
A new Preference to allow for English units of CFM, Deg F, inches of water pressure, etc.  but mm valve, lift and engine dimensions has been added.  See Figure A43.  Head Porter only. 
The Electronics or FlowCom screen has been enlarged in its default setting.  You can still enlarge to most any size you want by turning on the appropriate Preference setting.  See Figure A43-B.   All versions. 
You can now include a “gauge” (bar graph) for some readings on the Electronics or FlowCom screen.  This gives you a graphical representation of the stability of the readings and if the readings are going higher or lower than expected values.  See Figure A43-B.   Head Porter only. 
Data Analysis (including Graphs and Reports): 
You can create custom, user defined graphs, where you choose what data gets included.  For example, you can graph CFM and Swirl and % Exh/Int on the same graph.  See Figure A44, A45.  Head Porter only. 
Program now allows for graphing Flow results corrected to 2 different test pressures.  See Figure A46.  Head Porter only. 
You have several options to allow for more options for doing Port Velocity Graphs.  This is an extension to the feature to be able to record Port Velocity for many more data points.  See Figure A47.  Head Porter only. 
You can now specify if you want the Test Piece picture to be drawn smaller in printouts in portrait mode.  (See “Other” category for Test Piece picture.) This can allow for more printed text to be included with the graph on 1 page.  NOTE: In landscape mode, the Test Piece picture is always drawn small on the same line as the test title.  The Test Piece picture can also be printed in reports.  See Figure A48.  Head Porter only. 
You can now select a single cylinder to make graphs which require a valve lift profile, like Flow Area and Pseudo Flow Velocity.  In previous versions, only the Average Flow for the entire head was used.  Head Porter only. 
You can now request the graph to be printed in a smaller height.  This can allow for more printed text to be included with the graph on 1 page. See Figure A49.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
You can now select a Preference to have the graph NOT autoscale when you first open it.  This can be handy if you are using some pre-defined scales and want to keep them for all graphs.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Added a graph line thickness between Thin and Thick, called Thin 'Plus'.  See Figure A50.  All versions. 
The graph line styles in the drop down menu of line thicknesses are listed together, with the appropriate check mark by the type currently used.  See Figure A50.  All versions. You can now select larger legends (labels) in the graph screen.  See Figure A50.  Pro and Head Porter only. Added label to better explain what cylinder or that Average of All Cylinders will be used for Flow Area and Pseudo Flow 
Velocity graphs.  Pro and Head Porter only. The graph screen now should more completely fill the available screen in most all situations.  All versions. Improved appearance of some printed graphs, especially in Landscape orientation.  Previously the graphs had a border drawn 
around them.  On the left side, the border could be broken.  On the right side the legend (labels) could also be distorted.  Now 
the border is not drawn in those locations.  See Figure A49.  All versions. The graph choices have been simplified by eliminating many of the Int, Exh, and Int & Exh choices into just 1 choice.  Now the program looks to a separate input of "Port to Graph" for this setting Int, Exh, and Int & Exh choices.  See Figure A45. All versions. 
Fixed bug where the Port Velocity Map was not being graphed correctly.  Pro and Head Porter only. Made Overlap Graphs go to zero at start and beginning of graph to look more correct.  Pro and Head Porter only. Fixed bug where graphs for % Exh/Int only showed the first cylinder on the head even though you requested all cylinders to be 
graphed. Pro and Head Porter only. 
Added menu command 'Edit Printed Comments & Data Output' under the File option on the Graph screen in the printing options section.  Pro and Head Porter only. Program now includes more example cam files, the same files included in the new Engine Analyzer v3.4.  See Figure A51.  Pro 
and Head Porter only. 
Hardware: 
Pro version now allows for Performance Trends’ motor controller to be used.  See Figure A52.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
Program now allows for a USB switch to be used for starting to record data.  This option does not present conflicts with some features of the SuperFlow Flowcom.  This is done buy purchasing the proper switch from Performance Trends, then going into FlowCom or Electronics screen, clicking on Options at the top, then select the USB Switch Option.  You must also set the proper Com Port for the USB Switch under this option also.  See Figure A53.  All versions. 
In the Bench Specs screen, the program now allows for Valve Opener for any Pro version.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
Added Hot Wire (hot wire anemometer mass air flow sensor) as a Custom Bench Type.  See Figure A54.  All versions. 
Other: 
The program now lets you "Filter" tests in the library for finding tests of a certain date, certain file name, etc.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
When quitting program and you select 'Cancel' for Saving Changes to current test file, now the program keeps program open. 
Before v3.5B, it continued shutting down.  All versions. The option for using a 2 pulse swirl meter, to be read directly with a FlowCom (no Performance Trends electronics) has been added. In addition, a special calibration factor for this 2 Blade Swirl meter is also possible.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
Fixed bug where reports may be requested for intake and exhaust ports, but only intake ports were reported.  All versions. 
Fixed bug where the cylinders you may "Pick" for a report were not being shown clearly (another input was in front of it).  All versions. Fixed bug where FlowCom/Electronics screen could be off screen too high or too far to left.  All versions. Fixed bug where Test Comments were not being shown in the Preview when opening some older Port Flow files.  All versions.  Updated a text file to more accurately show Mass Flow correctly for gm/sec and lb/min, and correct for proper air density specs.  
Pro and Head Porter only. 
Program now hides the 'Range' column for bench types which have only 1 range, like EZ Flow, JKM, new Hot Wire, and LFE.    See Figure A55.  All versions. Program now shows the Company Logo graphic on the main screen.  See Figure A55.  Pro and Head Porter only. Added option to include a Test Piece Pic with your data file.  This could be of the head, carb, etc.  It is displayed on the main 
screen and in printouts if you choose to included it from the "Print Options" list (graphs and reports).  See Figure A55.  Head Porter only. Program no longer 'nags' as much about using the CFM at 0 lift as Leakage.  All versions. New Example Flow Files have been added to show new features. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A41 More Port Velocity Options 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A42 Port Velocity Reports 
First columns of report 
No letter indicates depth 
Choose this Report Type 
Bottom rows of report. 
Averages for all valve lifts at each position and depth across all 
t Last columns of report 
“C” for depth C 
Averages for depths A (blank), B and C 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A43-B Bar Gauges for Selected Readings. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A44 Custom, User Defined Graphs 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A46 Custom Graph at 2 Test Pressures Choose Corr. CFM vs Lift ONLY. Note, correcting to 2 test pressures only works for this data type. 
Set this to Yes. 
Select the Second Test Pressure you want the data corrected to. Note: The First Test Pressure is set as “New Int Test Pres, ‘’water” on the left side. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 







Figure A50 New Graph Features: Line Thickness and Larger Legends 

Various combinations of line thickness and Legend Size 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A51 More Example Cams for Engine Specs Screen 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 10: New Features in v3.5 C 
Port Flow Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v3.0 for Windows. These include 
3.0 A through v3.0 E, v3.5 A, v3.5 B and now v3.5 C. For the features added to the v3.5 B since Appendix 9 was written, refer to the Readme.doc file (click on Help, then Display Readme.doc File) in the program.  Listed here are features introduced in v3.5 C: 
• 
Basic Version 

• 
Professional (Pro) Version (includes all Basic features and more advanced Pro features) 

• 
Head Porter Version (includes all Basic and Professional features and more advanced Head Porter features) 


Here is a listing of the major enhancements and new features for v3.5 C. 
Data Recording: 
There is now an option under Velocity in the Recording screen for producing different pitch sounds for the port velocity.  This way you can listen to the port velocity change as you move your pitot tube or Electronic Velocity Probe in the port.  Now you can concentrate on exactly where the probe is and hear if that area has high or low velocity.  Head Porter Version only.  Fig A56. 
The program now has several new features for reading swirl and tumble.  Fig A56. 
• 
The program now saves individual USB Swirl Readings and checks them to see if there are any outliers (outside 25% of the average). If there are any of these readings, they are omitted and a new average and spread (+/- %) is calculated. 

• 
You can now pick from 3 different analog swirl meter inputs for the new USB Black Box.   

• 
The program now disables menu item Micro USB Swirl Version if you have not checked Micro USB Swirl as the type of Swirl Meter.   

• 
The program is now more reliable at realizing Swirl readings were not being recorded, and eliminated checking swirl settings "behind the scenes". 

• 
Now there is an option under Swirl/Tumble in Calibrations screen of None to turn off Swirl and Tumble features.  

• 
Program now checks to see if USB Swirl Meter and Logger (SF Flowcom, Black Box, etc) are using same Com Port and warns you of conflict. 

• 
If you are not recording either Swirl or Tumble, the “Rezero Swirl/Tumble” option in the Recording screen is not shown. Fig A59. 


The program now displays message only once for each program startup that the units are not matching between the Flowcom and the program’s settings. 
Program now records only 1 reading for Port Velocity reading if you are using a FlowCom and was having the FlowCom doing "slower, more reliable" communications via a Preference Setting.  This speeds up testing when recording slowly.   
The program now better averages data readings you are using a FlowCom and was having the FlowCom doing "slower, more reliable" communications via a Preference Setting to speed up testing. 
Program now fixes corrupt FlowCom strings when checking for flow bench type.   
Added option in FlowCom or Electronics screen to allow displaying of the Actual CFM (not corrected for test pressure). If you request 'Show Actual CFM', the Corrected CFM is displayed in a slightly smaller font, and the Actual CFM (not corrected for test pressure) is displayed in an even smaller font below it.  Pro and Head Porter version only.  Fig A63. 
The program now has a lower limit for displaying live CFM reading for some types of loggers.  Note that the correct data was recorded and displayed if you recorded the data point, it was just not displayed in the FlowCom or Electronics screen.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The program now more reliably lets you know the pressure sensors are maxed out (producing incorrect data) for the new Black Box Mini USB.  Fig A58. 
Data Analysis (including Graphs and Reports): 
Program now has a Printed Data option for printing the actual Port Velocity numbers on the Port Velocity Maps.  Click on File, then "Edit Printed Comments and Data Output" and check "Include Port Vel. Map Numbers".  Head Porter Version only.  Fig A62. 
Fixed bug where the averages for the Exhaust data in reports could be done incorrectly.  Intake data was always OK.   
The limits for the bar gauges in the Recording Screen for the Head Porter version are now set in Preferences, under the “Printing/Graphing” tab. Before this they were set in the Recording Screen, but this was unreliable because of communications taking place with a data logger. Fig A59. 
You can now include a graph or “live data” on the Recording Screen to track trends in several variables during testing. Head Porter Version only.    Fig A63. 
There is now a Preference setting to let you keep the Graph on the main screen always at the same graph scales.  This can cause problems if you open files with different lifts and flows than you normally run, or the heads you flow produce quite different flows.  However, if your tests are always at about the same lift and flow, this new Preference makes it easier to spot changes with the graph on the main screen.  Pro and Head Porter Version only.    Fig A64. 
Hardware: 
For our EZ Flow systems, there is a new feature letting you add a special “Low Flow” sensor.  This lets you measure very low flows to check for leakage or for measuring flows on very small components or at very low valve lifts.  Head Porter Version only.    Fig A65, A66. 
Added option in FlowCom screen to set the Delay Time for turning the SF1020 motor on/off if doing flow range change or flow direction change.  Fig A59. 
FlowCom screen lets you change the flow direction for the SF1020 bench.  Fig A59. 
If you use a recording switch in a temperature channel AND use the same channel for recording temperature, the "temperature" which is considered pressing the Record Switch has been lowered from about 158 deg F down to about 150 deg F.  This better ensure the system will see the recording switch, but can create problems if you are trying to record temperatures which are close to 150 deg F (extremely unusual condition).   
Emailing and File Handling: 
Under 'File', then 'Save As' there are new options to see other files in each folder, then choose a name from the folder to make it easy to modify a new name based on a previously used name.  There is also a new "Add New" button to easily add a new folder name.  Fig A67. 
Under 'File', then 'Save As' there is a new “Edit Many Tests” button.  This allows you to identify many tests, by using the Ctrl key when clicking on a test, or clicking on a test, then hold the shift key to click on another test and identify all the tests in between.  Then you can choose to Delete these tests (actually send to recycle bin), or copy or move these tests to a different folder.  If you choose ‘Move’ they are removed from the current folder.  Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A69. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
There is a new Open option of "List by Access Date".  With this activated, the most recent test files you have worked with show up at the top of the list.  Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A73. 
Many screens now allow for much longer folder and file names.  These include the “Open a File”, “Save As”,  “Starting a New Test”, Filtered Files displayed in Notepad, etc. 
Now using the Filter Files option, you can select which folders to check when you click "Print list of all files fitting these conditions".  Pro and Header Porter versions only. 
Replaced "Copy" with "Copy (or Merge)" to list of Folder Options possible in 'Save As' screen. 
Program can now better display PDFs like the users manual in some versions of Windows 10.  Related to this, there is a new button in Preferences for "Look for New Adobe Acrobat Reader".  This way you can manually browse your computer to find the program you want to use for displaying PDFs.  Fig A64. 
Made several refinements to printouts and displaying screens, especially if you were including a company logo or a Test Piece picture.   
There is a new Edit option of Combine Tests.  It lets you combine 2 or more tests into 1.  Header Porter versions only.    Fig A60, A61. 
Files and folders you delete now are actually sent to the Recycle Bin so they can be recovered later if you want.  Fig A68. 
The program is better at adding numbers to the end of file names by default.  Now it will add 3 digits, like “testname001” so that you can record up to 1000 files with the base name “testname”.  Prior to this it would just default to “testname1”. 
Now when you open a file which has a Graph Name specified in the History Log, that Graph Name stays with the file.  Previously it was restored to the default as being the File Name.   
The program now has several enhancements for automatically emailing files, reports and graphs.  Many of these are required to work with newer OSs, like Win 7 and Win 10.  Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A71, A72.  These include 
• 
Program now has an 'Email Report' option in the Report screen under 'File' to explain how to email a report.  There is also a new 'Emailing' option at the top of the Reports screen explaining different emailing options for reports. 

• 
Under 'File' on the Reports screen, there is now a check box for emailing the ASCII file to an email address after it has been written. 

• 
There is a new option in Preferences to manually locate "Location of PDF Printer Output File".  This is needed in newer OSs where the PDF printer can be unpredictable.   

• 
Now if you cancel the process of printing a PDF file for a report and emailing it, the process stops and does not proceed through to the Emailing screen.   


After making a report, the File option for creating an ASCII text file has a new option.  It is for making a .csv file which is compatible with Microsoft Excel. Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A72. 
Other: 
The Main Screen graph now has a title and a description of test pressure.  Fig A61. The program now better handles the Preference Setting "Early (pre 1998) FlowCom?" when it is set to "No". There is now a button in Preferences to explain how the weather corrections are used and when they are needed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Program now explains why changes in 'Starting a New Test' screen are not saved if you don't start a new test.   
If you change the printer within the program to something other than the computer's default printer, the program now restores the default printer (and printer orientation) when it shuts down.   
The program is now be more reliable at opening pages on the internet for a wider range in internet browsers.   
The main screen is refreshed any time you resize it.  This way all parts of the main screen displayed when you make a change.  Prior to this, you may not see all parts of the main screen until you went into a different screen and then returned to the main screen. 
Program now displays a Progress Bar when looking for Com Ports so you know something is happening when it is checking.  The program is now also less likely to say Com 3 is a correct Com Port, when it actually is not the correct port. 
Program as an improved method for "Force These Lifts" button in Test Options screen, where extra rows are not blanked out and program checks if you want increments of Lift or L/D (previously was just Lift).   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A56 Sound to Indicate Port Velocity 


Visit our website page www.performancetrends.com. Then click on Support at the top, then Movie Demo Files for our movies page to watch and hear how this feature works. There is also a link on that page to visit our youtube page, where the movies may play better for a wider range of computers. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 





Figure A60 New Edit Feature to Combine 2 Tests into 1 Test File 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A61 New Edit Feature to Combine 2 Tests into 1 Test File, cont 
Find the test file you want to combine with the current test you started the “Combine” process with. 
Then click the “Combine” button to complete the process. 
After the Combine edit of combining the original test with cylinders 1,3,5,7 with a test with cylinders 2,4,6,8 you now have a test file with cylinders 1 through 8. 
Graph now shows the port identification and the pressure the data is corrected to. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A62 Including Port Velocity Numbers on Printed Port Velocity Maps 
Click here under File in the Port Velocity Map Graph screen. 
If you have Head Porter version you can check this option box. 
Printouts will now include the exact Port Velocity number at each position you recorded. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A63 Include Graph on Recording Screen and Display Actual CFM 


The limits you set for the particular data you want on the graph are the same as the bar graph for that data. These limits are now set in Preferences. See Figure A59.  
Actual CFM is being shown here in a smaller font, below the Corrected CFM. Note that the Corrected CFM is higher because the Actual Test Pressure of 5.84 is less than the desired Test Pressure of 10. The program is correcting the Actual CFM up to what it should be if the Test Pressure was actually 10.  

You can also click here to turn off the graph.  
Graph being drawn as you watch readings in the Recording screen.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A64 New Preference Settings 
Several other settings for the graph on the main screen were moved down on this tab (page) to be grouped together. 
This button lets you browse your computer to find Acrobat Reader for displaying PDF files, like the User Manual. 
Three new Preference settings for the graph scales on the main screen. Choose Auto-Scaling to have the graphs automatically scaled to match the data for a particular test. This was the method done before this Preference was added. 
With the settings shown in Preferences screen above, the graph for this particular head is shown with good detail. If the next head you flow has significantly higher flow, it will be easier to spot because the graph scales stay the same. 
Scales were set for 200 CFM and .500” lift, which are too small for this data.  If your results change a lot, select “Auto-Scaling” to avoid this problem 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A65 EZ Flow with Low Flow Sensor 
Low Flow sensor for 4” EZ Flow. 
Low Flow sensor installed with flow straighteners both before and after it for optimum accuracy. 
Each graph below is for 4 repeat tests where the CFM was changed from 0 CFM at the 0 lift point linearly up to 45 CFM at the 1.0 lift point on an SF300 flow bench on range 2.  This 4” EZ Flow system has a max flow capability of 400 CFM.  With perfect results, we would see a 
perfectly straight line from 0 to 45 CFM. 
With the Low Flow Sensor option, the flow results are accurate all the way down to 0 CFM flow. 
With the standard EZ Flow system without the Low Flow Sensor option, the results are quite scattered below about 15 CFM. Many times you want to measure low flow to check for leakage or to measure flow at low valve lifts. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A66 EZ Flow with Low Flow Sensor, cont 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A67 New “Save As” Features 
Click on File, then Save As 
Click this Check Box for new info and options. Many times you may want to see what other files are in this same folder, or use one of these file names as the New Test Name, or possibly modify that name slightly. 
Here we are listing Test Files alphabetically by name. 
Using the Picked  
Choose a Test name from  name and then  
the list, then click here to  modifying it slightly.  
copy that name to the New  
Test Name field.  

Listing by Date 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A68 Saving Deleted Files and Folders to Recycle Bin 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A69 New “Edit Many” Feature 
New button option under File, then Open… Click it for a new screen shown to the right. 
This screen lets you highlight many files at once. Click one to highlight it and then hold down the <Shift> key and click another file and all files listed in between are highlighted. Or click on files one at a time while holding the <Ctrl> key to select or de-select files one at a time.  
Once files are selected, click one of these 4 buttons for the action. “Move” means the files will be removed from the existing location.  

If you selected Copy or Move, the program will ask you to choose a Folder to Copy or Move the files to.  In this example, we chose to ‘Move” the files highlighted, and chose choose the folder “Harley” as shown below. 
The Gautama folder shows the files selected 
If you click on the Harley are now gone. 
folder you will see the 5 files selected moved there. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A71 New Emailing Features, cont 
Once Acrobat is shut down, enter “Email to:”, and message, and other info here, then click the Send button. 
If you set the Preference of “Browse to PDF File When Emailing It” to Yes, this message will appear. Click OK to proceed to locating the PDF file for emailing. 
Many times Acrobat will open the PDF file to display it, as shown here. As this message describes, if the Port Flow program senses Acrobat has this file  open, you MUST shut down Acrobat or Acrobat Reader to release the PDF file for emailing. Once you do this, click OK on this message to continue. 
Browse to the PDF file, then click Open. 
Emailing screen after finding and “opening” the PDF file. 
Message that email and PDF file have been sent. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A72 New Export a Report as an Excel File Click on File at the top of the Report screen to export an ASCII text file of the report. 
New option to export as a .csv file which can be open with Microsoft Excel. 
New option to automatically email the ASCII file you create. 
If the File Name you specify does not end with a .csv extension, one will be added automatically. 
File is created and Excel is the default program to open it. 
Port Flow Report data opened up in Excel. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A73 List Files by Access Date 
Choose this option and the files will be listed by the date they were last modified or opened. 
With this option checked, you will see the date listed here, with the tests with the most recent date listed at the top. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples (C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Index 
2 Blade, 191 
3D-Graphs, 174 
accuracy, 3, 18, 20, 59, 71, 112, 122, 145, 146, 151, 152 
Accuracy, 6, 145 
accurate, 12, 18, 20, 23, 28, 34, 41, 60, 68, 70, 75, 79, 112, 117, 130, 139, 145, 146, 147, 151, 152, 153, 162, 163, 176 
accurately, 33, 34, 41, 117, 120, 123, 146, 150, 151, 153, 191 
Actual CFM, 207 
Actual Valve Lash, 46 
Adjust, 117, 163 
Adobe, 173, 174, 209 
Air Flow, 74 
Alternate Folder, 173 
Anemometer, 152, 190 
Area, 28, 40, 69, 70, 75, 77, 78, 94, 173 
Ascii File, 5, 1, 63, 83, 174, 209 
Assumptions, 6, 3, 12, 33, 46, 47, 48, 67, 73, 75, 78, 118, 129, 145, 173, 187 
Automatic Valve Opener, 175, 190 
Avg Port Dia, 34, 71, 75, 76, 140 
Avg Port Diameter, 34, 71 
Avg Port Height, 34, 71 
Avg Port Width, 34 
back up, 12, 155, 157, 158 
Backup, 155, 157, 158, 173 
Barometer, 1, 18, 19, 30, 62, 122, 176 
Barometric Pressure, 18, 19, 30 
Baseline, 21, 35, 56 
Basic Version, 2, 5, 22, 33, 68, 87, 129, 166, 173, 174, 175, 176 
Bench Specs, 5, 7, 12, 16, 17, 18, 20, 23, 30, 41, 42, 44, 56, 60, 97, 112, 113, 120, 123, 145, 148, 149, 150, 152, 153, 155, 161, 162, 175, 176, 190 
Black Box, 59, 60, 159, 160, 165, 175, 176, 207, 208 
Black Box Reads +/- Pressure, 176 
Bore, 14, 29, 49, 51, 52 
Bore Adapter, 14, 29 
Bottom Cutter #, 39 
calibrate, 43, 120, 148, 149, 160, 162, 175 
Calibrate Range, 175 
calibration, 14, 57, 61, 113, 119, 120, 149, 150, 152, 153, 162, 163, 165, 175, 191 
cam, 1, 3, 27, 38, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 53, 71, 72, 76, 77, 78, 94, 130, 135, 136, 137, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 146, 166, 171, 176, 190 
Cam, 3, 25, 27, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 76, 135, 143, 166, 176 Cam Advance, 48, 176 
Cam File, 27, 47, 166 
camshaft, 1, 139 
Centerline, 45, 47 
CFM, 1, 7, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 27, 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, 43, 44, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71, 72, 74, 81, 86, 87, 105, 106, 112, 113, 116, 117, 118, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 133, 139, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 166, 167, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 189, 191, 207 
CFM Flow, 17, 30, 44, 57, 62, 147 
Chamber CCs, 40, 52 
Chamber CCs in Head, 52 
clearance vol, 49, 52, 78, 79 
Clearance Volume, 49, 52, 79 
coefficient, 70, 94 
Coil Bind Height, 38, 39 
color, 1, 95, 174 
Color, 1, 95, 166, 173, 174 
Com Port, 43, 165, 175, 190, 207, 210 
Combine Tests, 209 
Comment, 98, 122 
Company Logo, 173, 191 
Compare Heads, 80, 81, 167 
compression, 8, 45, 49, 52, 78, 139, 143 
Compression Ratio, 8, 45, 49, 51, 52, 78, 79, 143 
Controller, motor, 171, 190 
Convert to Columns, 83 
copy, 2, 5, 22, 26, 41, 56, 102, 103, 117, 119, 129, 155, 157, 165, 166, 173, 208 
Correct to New Test Pres, 65, 86, 87, 133 
correction, 14, 17, 28, 57, 65, 71, 72, 86, 117, 125, 126, 140, 152, 153, 175 
CrCFM, 72, 80, 81, 129, 130, 132, 167 
Current Test, 9, 57, 87, 108, 111, 130, 134, 135 
Cursor, 89, 91 
curtain, 68 
Curtain, 69 
custom, 1, 12, 16, 42, 44, 145, 147, 149, 159, 175, 176, 189 
Custom Graphs, 189 
customer, 15, 36, 139, 143 
Customer, 1, 9, 28, 36, 105, 106, 121 
Cyl-Cyl Comparison, 67, 132, 166, 167, 174 
Cylinder Numbering, 35 
Data, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 20, 21, 26, 31, 35, 36, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 63, 66, 67, 68, 72, 79, 81, 83, 86, 89, 94, 101, 112, 113, 116, 117, 118, 122, 123, 124, 126, 127, 129, 149, 150, 155, 157, 162, 166, 167, 169, 173, 174, 187, 189, 190, 207, 208 
date, 14, 44, 56, 80, 114, 123, 155, 157, 190 
delete, 36, 102, 107, 165, 209 
Demo, 2, 5, 7, 22 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Depth, 167 Designed Valve Lash, 46, 48 Dew Point, 19, 30 Diameter, 27, 29, 34, 114, 149, 152 Difference Column, 174 Disk, 26, 157 Display, 173, 174 DOS, 9, 16, 28, 48, 102, 104 Duration, 46, 47, 48, 76, 77, 136, 143 Duration @ .050, 47, 76 
Edit, 16, 21, 56, 87, 89, 92, 108, 165, 173, 174, 190, 208, 209 
Edit (copy/swap/erase ports), 21 
Edit Many Tests, 208 
Electronic Interface, 5, 1, 17, 18, 20, 61, 62, 120, 145, 159, 161, 162 
Email, 1, 3, 173, 209 
Eng. Performance Estimate, 73, 137, 139, 140, 143, 145, 167 
Engine Library, 26, 139 
Engine Performance Est., 6, 48, 65, 73, 139, 140, 176 
Engine Specs, 5, 8, 11, 21, 23, 45, 49, 73, 76, 77, 79, 97, 98, 112, 122, 135, 136, 139, 143, 166, 176 
Enter Cam File Directly, 27 
errors, 25, 26, 48, 55, 66, 125, 133, 145, 146, 151, 152 
Est Idle Vac, 78 
Excel, 209 
Exhaust Adapter, 30 
EZ Flow, 149, 175, 176, 191, 208 
EZ Start Wizard, 4, 56, 111, 173 
Face Width, 37 
Factor, 5, 14, 17, 57, 123, 124, 125, 145, 153, 162, 163 
FArea, 167 
file, 2, 4, 5, 7, 10, 14, 20, 21, 27, 36, 41, 56, 65, 66, 73, 83, 84, 87, 88, 98, 102, 103, 107, 108, 111, 113, 119, 120, 122, 128, 134, 136, 139, 143, 157, 158, 165, 173, 174, 189, 190, 191, 207, 209 
File name, 35 
Filter, 5, 1, 15, 27, 37, 105, 166, 173, 190, 209 
First Lift, 31, 122 
First Lift to Record Velocity, 31, 122 
Flow, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 35, 36, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 63, 66, 67, 68, 70, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 83, 86, 87, 94, 97, 101, 102, 103, 105, 108, 111, 112, 113, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 135, 136, 137, 139, 140, 145, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 157, 160, 162, 165, 166, 167, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 187, 189, 190, 191, 207, 208 
Flow Area, 70, 72, 77, 78, 86, 87, 94, 129, 136, 137, 140, 167, 189, 190 
Flow Coef, 2, 28, 70, 86, 94, 129, 130, 167 
Flow Pres, 12, 16, 17, 57, 116, 117, 127, 145, 148, 149, 151, 165, 175 
Flow Temp, 17, 57, 62, 145, 165 
FlowCom, 3, 5, 6, 1, 17, 18, 19, 20, 28, 43, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 119, 120, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 145, 159, 165, 166, 169, 172, 173, 175, 189, 190, 191, 207, 208, 209 
FlwArea, 70, 129 
FMA Flow Bench, 175 
Folders, 2, 4, 7, 9, 21, 25, 26, 28, 36, 56, 80, 83, 103, 104, 106, 107, 114, 119, 122, 129, 134, 139, 155, 157, 158, 165, 173, 187, 208, 209 
Foot Switch, 175 
Force These Lifts, 210 
Format, Open/Save/Edit, 174 
Free Height, 38 
Fuel Flow, 74 
Full Scale Reading, 42, 43, 148 
Gasket Bore Dia, 52 
Gasket Thickness, 51, 52 
Gauge, 75, 189 
Graph, 1, 7, 10, 15, 16, 20, 22, 26, 27, 28, 56, 60, 67, 69, 78, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 107, 108, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 165, 166, 173, 174, 189, 190, 208, 209 
Graph Dot Matrix Printer Adjustment, 28 
Graph line thickness, 27, 190 
Graph Live Data, 208 
Graph Scales, Main Screen, 208 
Graph Type, 7, 86, 133, 135, 136 
Graphics, 173 
Graphs, 5, 85, 87, 88, 89, 95, 133, 135, 136, 139, 167, 174, 189, 190, 208 
Grid, 166 
Gross Valve Lift, 47, 53 
Head #, 36, 56, 108, 114, 121, 122, 165, 166 
Head Comments, 35, 36 
Head Details, 5, 23, 36, 37, 55, 97, 98, 112, 121, 155, 166, 173, 174 
Head Porter, 85, 95, 132, 189, 190, 191, 207, 208 
Head Specs, 5, 7, 8, 14, 16, 21, 23, 27, 33, 35, 36, 40, 56, 71, 75, 76, 97, 98, 101, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 120, 121, 155, 166, 174 
Header, 75, 208, 209 
Height, 34, 37, 52, 75, 121, 173 
Help, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 15, 23, 36, 43, 51, 55, 61, 113, 165, 175, 187, 189, 207 
History Log, 5, 1, 20, 27, 63, 88, 102, 107, 108, 134, 174, 209 
horsepower, 1, 3, 12, 139 
Hot Wire, 190, 191 
HP, 48, 71, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 139, 140, 143, 176 
Ht, 40 
Hub, 6, 187 
Humidity, 1, 19, 30 
Import, 1, 63, 165, 174 Inclined Flow Manometer, 16, 17, 42, 148 Include a Zero Lift (.000) Point ?, 31 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Include Averages, 174 Include Text, 83 Install, 22, 36, 89, 171, 173 Installed Height, 37, 38, 39 Intake Adapter, 29 
JKM, 166, 175, 191 jpg, 173 
L/D, 16, 31, 56, 68, 70, 72, 80, 81, 86, 98, 116, 122, 129, 130, 165, 166, 167, 173, 210 
Landscape, 108, 189, 190 
lash, 45, 46, 47, 48, 78, 94 
Lash, 45, 46, 47, 48 
Layout, 15, 75, 76 
Leakage, 14, 17, 31, 57, 59, 60, 78, 116, 117, 118, 122, 123, 126, 128, 151, 191, 208 
legend, 89, 92, 108, 137, 190 
Length, 27, 34, 37, 75, 121 
LFE, 191 
Library, 9, 10, 12, 20, 26, 36, 57, 66, 80, 87, 88, 101, 102, 103, 105, 106, 107, 111, 118, 119, 129, 131, 134, 139, 155, 157 
lift, 16, 31, 34, 38, 45, 46, 47, 48, 53, 67, 68, 70, 71, 72, 76, 77, 81, 94, 98, 116, 117, 118, 122, 126, 128, 129, 130, 133, 135, 173, 189, 191, 208 
Lift, 16, 31, 39, 46, 47, 48, 53, 57, 59, 62, 68, 69, 70, 72, 76, 80, 81, 86, 94, 116, 117, 122, 127, 129, 130, 132, 133, 136, 165, 167, 173, 210 
Lift for Rating Events, 46, 48 
lifter, 48 
Lifter, 46, 48, 77 
Lifter (profile) Type, 46, 48 
Line thickness, 27, 190 
Linear Scale (like a ruler), 43, 148 
List by Access Date, 209 
Live Data, Graph, 208 
Lobe Area, 76, 78 
Lobe Center, 76 
lobe centerline, 143 
Lobe Separation, 49, 77 
Lock Groove, 37 
Locks, 39 
Logo, Company (picture), 173, 174, 209 
Main Screen, 5, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 35, 36, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 65, 66, 85, 87, 88, 102, 103, 106, 107, 114, 115, 116, 119, 120, 123, 127, 128, 129, 133, 135, 136, 139, 140, 143, 157, 171, 173, 175, 209 
Main Screen Graph Lines, 27 
Main Screen Graph Scales, 208 
Main Screen, Other Cyl. Graphs, 15, 26 
manometer, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 20, 29, 42, 43, 44, 60, 62, 112, 117, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 153, 163, 176 
Margin Width, 38 
Mass air flow sensor, 190 
Mass Flow, 166, 167, 191 Master Bench Specs, 41, 112, 113, 120 Material, 40 Max Lobe Lift, 46, 47, 48, 53 Max Setting, 31 Max Tappet Lift, 51 Max Valve Lift, 38, 39 Metric, 166, 176 Motor controller, 171, 190 
Network, 6, 25, 165, 187 
Networking, 6, 25, 165, 173, 187 
New Exh Test Pres, 65, 68, 86, 87 
New Int Test Pres, 65, 68, 86 
New Test, 5, 14, 20, 55, 56, 57, 68, 111, 112, 113, 114, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 125, 166, 209, 210 
Number of Cylinders to Test, 21, 56 
Number of Rows of Data, 29 
Offset, 162, 163 
Open, 7, 9, 20, 21, 26, 35, 37, 55, 57, 101, 102, 105, 106, 107, 117, 119, 124, 125, 129, 131, 134, 135, 136, 139, 157, 165, 166, 174, 209 
Open (from all saved tests), 9, 20, 102, 107, 119, 129, 136, 139 
Open/Save/Edit, 174 
Opener, Valve, 175, 190 
Operator, 15, 56, 105, 106, 114, 122 
orifice, 12, 14, 57, 123, 125, 126, 145, 147, 149, 150, 152, 153, 175 
Orifice Std Pres, 17 
Other Calc Data, 72, 167 
Other Data, 43 
Overlap, 77, 78, 86, 167, 190 
PDF, 173, 174, 209 
performance estimate, 1, 73, 75 
Performance Flo, 175 
Picture, 173, 189, 209 
Picture File, 173 
Picture File (test piece), 189, 191, 209 
piston, 49, 52, 71, 74, 79, 140 
Piston Acceleration, 166, 167 
Piston Position, 166 
piston speed, 74, 140 
Piston Velocity, 166, 167 
Pitot, 1, 20, 34, 62, 71, 79, 86, 95, 122, 127, 128, 147, 173, 175 
Pitot Tube, 71, 86, 95, 127, 128, 165, 173, 175, 207 
Port Length, 27, 34, 75, 76 
Port Shape, 34, 40 
Port Vel, 15, 16, 20, 31, 60, 61, 62, 65, 71, 86, 87, 95, 119, 122, 127, 173, 174, 189, 190, 207, 208 
Port Velocity, 15, 16, 20, 60, 61, 62, 65, 86, 87, 95, 119, 122, 127, 128, 173, 174, 189, 190, 207, 208 
Port Velocity Map, 86, 95, 173, 174, 190, 208 
Port Velocity. Map, Include Numbers, 208 
Port Volume, 34, 75, 76, 143 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Preferences, 5, 7, 9, 15, 23, 25, 26, 33, 34, 56, 60, 70, 98, 106, 107, 108, 114, 129, 165, 166, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 187, 189, 207, 208, 209 
Pres at Mx V Lft, 38, 39 
Printed Graph Width, % of Page, 27 
Printer, 5, 2, 22, 27, 36, 63, 89, 97, 98, 131, 132, 140, 173, 174, 209 
Printer Fonts, 27, 98 
Printer Orientation, 22, 36, 173, 190, 210 
Pro Version, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 51, 56, 63, 65, 70, 72, 73, 79, 80, 83, 86, 88, 92, 94, 95, 97, 99, 102, 105, 107, 112, 121, 129, 130, 134, 135, 139, 145, 155, 165, 166, 173, 175, 176, 190 
Progress Bar, 210 
Psuedo Flow Velocity, 166, 167, 171 
Range, 16, 17, 18, 19, 44, 57, 59, 60, 62, 116, 117, 118, 123, 125, 126, 149, 150, 153, 175, 191 
Range #, 16, 44, 116, 118, 149, 153 
Rated Test Pressure, 42 
Raw Flow Data, 66, 155, 167 
record, 1, 14, 18, 19, 22, 23, 29, 30, 31, 43, 55, 57, 59, 60, 71, 79, 120, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 149, 153, 159, 165, 166, 172, 173, 175, 176, 189, 190, 208, 209 
Recording Switch, 175 
Recycle Bin, 209 
registered, 3, 1, 2, 5, 12, 22 
Reltv Hum, 19, 30 
Report Type, 65, 66, 129, 130, 140, 166, 173 
Restore, 155, 158, 173 
Retainers, 39 
re-zero, 61 
Rocker Arm, 45, 46, 47, 53, 176 
Rocker Arm Ratio, 45, 46, 47, 53, 176 
Rod Length, 49 
RPM, 3, 18, 19, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78, 140, 143, 166 
runner, 1, 34, 71, 75, 76, 77, 78, 140, 176 
Runner, 75 
Saenz, 3, 175 
Safety, 74, 143 
Save, 1, 7, 8, 9, 12, 20, 21, 25, 26, 35, 36, 41, 55, 56, 66, 83, 101, 102, 103, 104, 107, 108, 118, 120, 122, 128, 136, 145, 166, 173, 174, 175, 208, 209 
Save As, 21, 208, 209 
Scales, 93 
Screen Resolution, 173, 174 
Seat Angle, 34, 69, 70 
Seat Cutter #, 39 
Seat Inside Dia, 33 
Seat Width, 39 
Seated Pressure, 38 
Second Lift, 31 
Second Lift to Record Velocity, 31 
See Details (calibrations), 43, 160 
Set Test Pres, 60, 62, 171 
Setup, 4, 22, 36, 89, 171, 173 SF Cal. Test Pres. Corr., 28, 60 
Shape, 40 
Show Std EA Exmp Comparison, 27 
Single Velocity Data Point, 173 
Sound, 17 
Spring Description, 38 
Spring Rate, 38, 39 
Stability, 1, 15, 17, 18, 19, 72 
Standard Engine Analyzer Examples, 25 
Stem Diameter, 33 
Stem to Guide, 37 
Step Size, 31, 35 
Stroke, 49, 51 
Summary Graph, 15, 16, 85, 117, 133 
Super Flow, 3, 6, 1, 12, 14, 17, 18, 19, 27, 28, 41, 42, 43, 44, 59, 61, 62, 111, 113, 119, 120, 123, 125, 127, 145, 147, 151, 152, 153, 159, 161, 165, 172, 175, 190 
Swirl, 1, 18, 30, 43, 60, 62, 65, 71, 86, 87, 159, 163, 165, 166, 167, 189, 191, 207 
Switch, USB, 190 
Tabs, 13, 165 
Temperature, 1, 30, 145, 151, 165, 175 
Test Comments, 15, 35, 55, 56, 98, 122, 191 
Test Correction, 5, 14, 17, 57, 123, 124, 125, 145, 153, 175 

Test Data Grid, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 20, 30, 31, 59, 60, 62, 66, 67, 111, 112, 117, 118, 119, 123, 126, 128 
Test Folder Name in Program, 28 
Test Options, 5, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 29, 56, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65, 71, 72, 79, 86, 97, 98, 101, 111, 112, 114, 115, 116, 119, 121, 122, 126, 127, 155, 165, 166, 171, 189, 210 
Test Pattern, 9, 55, 122 
Test Piece, 189, 191, 209 
test pres, 1, 7, 12, 16, 17, 22, 28, 29, 42, 60, 65, 68, 70, 71, 72, 79, 80, 86, 108, 126, 129, 149, 150, 152, 165, 166, 171, 172, 174, 176, 189, 207, 209 
Test Pres, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 27, 29, 57, 60, 62, 65, 68, 70, 80, 86, 114, 116, 117, 123, 126, 127, 130, 145, 147, 152, 155, 165, 166, 171, 172 
Test Pres. for History Mx CFM, 27 
Test pressure, 1, 7, 12, 16, 17, 22, 28, 29, 42, 60, 65, 68, 70, 71, 72, 79, 80, 86, 108, 126, 129, 149, 150, 152, 165, 166, 171, 172, 174, 176, 189, 207, 209 
Test Pressure, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 27, 29, 57, 60, 65, 68, 70, 80, 86, 114, 127, 130, 145, 147, 152, 155, 165, 166, 171 
Test Pressure Set Points, 171 
test temperature, 165 
test time, 1, 14 
thermocouple, 161 
Time/Date, 44, 56, 114, 123 
Top Cutter #, 39 
torque, 1, 3, 48, 71, 73, 74, 78, 139, 140, 143, 165 
Torque, 74, 143 
Total Cam Advance, 45, 48 
Tq, 73, 143, 165 
Troubleshooting, 175 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Tumble, 1, 19, 30, 43, 60, 62, 65, 71, 86, 87, 159, 163, 166, 167, 207 
Tumble Settings, 30 
Unlocking, 2, 5, 7, 22 Unlocking Code, 2, 5, 22 Unlocking Program Options, 2, 5, 22 USB, 21, 157, 165, 175, 190, 207, 208 USB Switch, 190 Use Cam File, 47 Use Seat Angle to Calc Vlv Area, 28, 33, 34, 70, 129 Use Temp Correction, 17 Use Temperature Correction, 42 User Defined, 189 
Valve Area, 2, 69, 70, 86, 94, 167 
Valve Description, 14, 37 
Valve Dia, 33, 56, 108, 114 
Valve Diameter, 33, 56, 108, 114 
Valve Length, 37 
valve lift, 7, 13, 15, 16, 27, 29, 31, 46, 47, 53, 62, 68, 70, 77, 80, 81, 86, 94, 98, 114, 116, 117, 118, 122, 126, 127, 129, 163, 165, 166, 171, 189, 208 
Valve Opener, 175, 190 
Valve Seals, 39 
Valve Vel, 28, 70, 71 
Valve Weight, 37 VArea, 167 
velocity, 8, 20, 22, 31, 34, 65, 71, 75, 79, 86, 87, 95, 122, 128, 165, 166, 171, 173, 189, 207 
Velocity Probe, 207 
Version 3.5, 1, 28, 31, 43, 56, 57, 63, 65, 67, 81, 83, 84, 97, 104, 107, 111, 119, 129, 132, 135, 149, 155, 158, 173 
Vlv Area, 28, 68, 70, 81, 94, 129 
Volume, 34, 49, 52 
Volumetric Eff, 74 
volumetric efficiency, 74 
Wd, 40 
Weather, 152, 176 
Weight, 38 
Wet Flow benches, 173 
When Changing Head Specs Port Length, 27, 34 
Which Cylinder(s), 65, 87 
Width, 34, 71, 75, 121, 173 
Win 10, 209 
Win 7, 209 
Windows, 3, 1, 2, 21, 22, 26, 27, 35, 36, 89, 102, 103, 155, 156, 157, 158, 173, 187, 189, 207, 209 
Winflow, 165, 166, 173, 174 
Wizard, 4 
worksheet, 98 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 
Appendix 6:  New Features in V 3.0 E  
During the 3 years version 3.0 has been available, several minor bugs have been fixed and several new features added.  Listed below are some of the main new features in Version 3.0 E.  Minor bug fixes are not listed, but are available in the more detailed Readme.doc file available from inside the program. 
• 
You can now jump got the Performance Trends website directly from the program under Help at the main screen. 

• 
You can now view the User’s Manual directly from the program under Help at the main screen. 

• 
Program now reads Performance Trends’ new, very affordable Black Box electronic data logger (interface).  Black box can read flow pressure, test pressure, pitot tube port velocity, test temp, flow temp, swirl, flow direction and an input from a switch to record data.  See Appendix 5. 

• 
Several new Edit options are available.  Now you can click on the top of the Lift or L/D column on the main screen to generate valve Lifts or L/Ds based on the settings in the Test Options screen.  See details below. 

• 
Using a new comp hardware number for unlocking the program, to hopefully be more stable.  NOTE that this version will require a different unlock # than previous versions. 

• 
Added feature to increment test pressure instead of valve lift  This is a method used for testing devices without various valve lifts, like mufflers, air cleaners, air meters, turbo components, etc.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added several features to allow program to direct FlowCom to set the Test Pressure for tests which vary test pressure (not valve lift). Three new Preferences allow you to 1) allow varying test pressure, 2) have the program set Test Pressure at each new point, and 3) have the program automatically increment through all test pressures, basically automating the test after you manually record data for the first point.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added several features to allow you to rename, add, delete and copy folders from the Open menu. 

• 
Now allow calibration pressure input for 1020 benches (typically 25 or 50 inches of water).  Previously it was assumed 50” for all SF 1020 benches. 

• 
Fixed a bug where the FlowCom’s barometer could be read incorrectly by the program as a small, negative number.  

• 
Added features to check and allow for Com Port #s up to 6. 

• 
Added F5, F6, F8, F9 “hot keys” to the main screen and FlowCom screen so you can navigate easier through many screens: 

• 
F5 Go to FlowCom or Electronics screen when at main screen. 

• 
F6 Go to Comments section when at main screen. 

• 
F8 go down one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #2.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
F9 go up one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #3.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
Esc key to close the FlowCom or Electronics screen and return to main screen. 



• 
Now allow up to 50 lines of printed comments.  This was previously limited to 20 lines of comments. 

• 
Greatly enhanced the ability of the program to read SuperFlow FlowComs with a wide variety of different computers and different generations of FlowComs. 

• 
Added a Browse button to the network folder option in Preferences menu. 

• 
Added Tabs to preferences screen to better organize preferences. 

• 
Improved print quality of most all screens and printed reports. 

• 
Add preference for using either Head # (original version) or now File Name for the default Graph Title. 

• 
Added Swirl Analysis report to calculated Estimated swirl torque in Tq, oz in and Newton mm. Pro version only.  

• 
Allow Raw Report to be corrected to different Test Pressures. 

• 
Allow Importing of Flow Pro FP and FP3 files, and some Winflow files, files from other types of flow bench programs.  Pro version only. 

• 
Added explanation of what Temperature is recorded in a 1020 bench. (It is not air flow temperature unless you have made provisions to record air temperature in your 1020.) 

• 
Program is now 32 bit, which means: It can use long file names. It should be more compatible with USB printers. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 
• 
Program now uses a faster method of reading the FlowCom.  This method also proved more reliable on the new, very fast computers. 

• 
Replaced the graph option of Swirl Stab with Swirl (abs) to graph absolute value of swirl.  This graphs all swirl numbers as a positive number so you can see RPM, but not direction.  Pro version only.  

• 
Corrected a problem where data other than CFM (like swirl) would not always be graphed or reported correctly if the valve lifts were not in order or similar for different ports. 

• 
Correct problem where opening 'Tip' would always show again, even if you selected to not see it again. 

• 
Added Mass Flow calculations to graphs and reports for English units.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added Option in FlowCom screen to ReZero Swirl/Tumble. 

• 
Allowed Foot or Hand Switch to signal to record data.  The user must 'double click' the switch in the current version. 

• 
Fixed a bug where the air temperature recorded by a 1020 bench was not being reported correctly in Reports. 

• 
Added a Note Tip that the air temperature recorded by a 1020 bench is "motor box"  temperature and not true air temp of the air flow stream. 

• 
Fixed a bug where printouts for head comparison reports were not complete if you requested a comparison of individual cylinders.  Pro version only. 

• 
Fixed several things to calculate Velocities, Gs, Piston Pos, FlowCoef, etc for Metric Units.   

• 
Added ability from the File menu (upper left corner of main screen) to Save To or Open From a floppy disk.  This makes it easier to copy files from one computer to another. 

• 
Added ability to read Cam Files in Engine Specs.  Now you can combine detailed Cam Dr, Cam Pro Plus, S96, Andrews, etc cam files with flow bench data for more detailed analysis.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added several engine analysis graphs like Psuedo Flow Velocity,  Piston Velocity, Piston Acceleration and Piston Position.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Main and graph screen now fills screen for larger resolution screens like 600x800 and larger. 

• 
Data tables included with graph were not using 'Alternate Names' which you had entered manually.  Pro version only.  

• 
Added feature to allow comparison reports between individual cylinders of different heads in the Pro version.  In the Reports Options screen, pick one of the Compare Report Types.  Then select one of the individual cylinders for Which Cylinder.  Then when you pick the test from the library for comparison, you are also asked which cylinder to compare to the cylinder of the first (current) test. 

• 
Fixed bug where Filter feature did not correctly find Test Dates.  Pro version only.  

• 
Fixed bug where Filtering Files = On did not allow head and engine files to be displayed in the Open File screen.  Pro version only. 

• 
Added ability to allow L/D increments to be graphed'and reported for port velocity measurements.  Pro version only.  

• 
Added ability to run JKM style flow bench.. 

• 
Fixed bug where arrow keys in Test Options erased Int and Exh port adapters if they were entered by hand. 

• 
Fixed bug where basic version could print Head Details and Engine specs in report printouts. 

• 
Put User Name at top of Report Printouts, moved Perf.Trends (C) to 3rd line. 

• 
Now allow 32 graph lines to be graphed at 1 time, which allows 2 8 cyl heads or 4 4 cyl heads to be graphed at once. 

• 
When Entering CFM Directly, the Test Pres Column has been eliminated.  The test pressure for the CFM data is now set as the Test Pressure in the Test Options menu.  This change eliminates a possible problem when Test Options Test Pres does not match Test Pres in the Data Grid column. 

• 
Fixed a problem in that not all the CFM data was being requested when you printed a Blank Worksheet. 

• 
Added a Preference to not require a Head # for a New Test.    Pro version only. 

• 
Now prints cursor line on graphs when printed. 

• 
Added a Preference to hide barometer in FlowCom screen. 

• 
Added 9 new report options for Pro version, mostly either asking for Int only or Exh only, and new Cyl-Cyl Comparison with cylinder CFM averages included.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added option to 'Hide' individual graph lines by right clicking on their name in the Legend on the right side of the graph.  Pro version only.  See details below. 

• 
Added new button in Preferences called 'Set Graph Colors' where you can manually set the colors of individual graph lines. 

• 
Program now reads some types of WinFlow files (mostly SF 600). Just 'click on' them (either the .PWD, .DAT or .FTD files) in the 'Open Test File' screen and follow the program directions.  Pro version only. 

• 
Added a Preference to disable valve spring specs from being automatically updated (calculated) from other valve spring inputs.  Pro version only. 

• 
Fixed bug where Head # was not always updated after being changed in the Head Specs menu.  Pro version only. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 
Complete List of Types of Reports, Many Are New 
Int & Exh Raw Flow Data  Int & Exh Cyl-Cyl Comparisn  Int & Exh Calculated Data  
Int & Exh Other Calc Data  Eng. Performance Estimate  Meas Int & Exh VelData  
Compare Heads - CrCFM @Lift  Compare Heads - VArea @Lift  Compare Heads - FArea @Lift  
Compare Heads – FlCf @ Lift  Compare Heads - VVel @ Lift  Compare Heads - PVel @ Lift  
Compare Heads - CrCFM @ L/D   Compare Heads - VArea @ L/D   Compare Heads - FArea @ L/D   
Compare Heads – FlCf @ L/D   Compare Heads - VVel @ L/D   Compare Heads - PVel @ L/D   
Int Raw Flow Data  Int Cyl-Cyl Comparisn  Int Calculated Data  
Int Other Calc Data  Exh Raw Flow Data  Exh Cyl-Cyl Comparisn  
Exh Calculated Data  Exh Other Calc Data  Int & Exh Cyl-Cyl Comp +Avg  
Int Mass Flow  Exh Mass Flow  Int & Exh Mass Flow  
Calc. Int Swirl Analysis  

Complete List of Types of Graphs, Many Are New 
Corr Int & Exh CFM   Corr Int CFM  Corr Exh CFM  
Calc Int Velocities  Calc Exh Velocities  Intake Swirl  
Int Swirl (abs)  Intake Tumble  Int Tumble Stab  
Int & Exh Flow Coef  Int Flow Coef  Exh Flow Coef  
% Exh/Int  Int Stablty  Exh Stablty  
Int & Exh Stablty  Int & Exh Flow+Valve Area  Int Flow + Valve Area  
Exh Flow + Valve Area  Int & Exh Flow Area+VlvLift  Int Flow Area + Valve Lift  
Exh Flow Area + Valve Lift  Overlap Flow + Valve Area  Overlap Flow + Valve Lift  
Meas Int Vel (port map)  Meas Exh Vel (port map)  Psuedo Flow Velocity,ft/sec  
Psuedo Flow Velocity, Mach#   Piston Velocity, ft/sec  Piston Velocity, ft/min  
Piston Acceleration, Gs  Piston Depth from TDC, in  Int Mass Flow Lb/Min   
Int STP Mass Flow Lb/Min   Exh Mass Flow Lb/Min   Exh STP Mass Flow Lb/Min   
Int & Exh Mass Flow Lb/Min   Int & Exh STP MsFlw Lb/Min   Int Mass Flow Gm/sec  
Int STP Mass Flow Gm/sec  Exh Mass Flow Gm/sec  Exh STP Mass Flow Gm/sec  
Int & Exh Mass Flow Gm/sec  Int & Exh STP MsFlw Gm/sec  

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 



Figure  A13  Edit Options 

Hot Keys for Data Recording (see figure A14 below): 
• 
F5 Go to FlowCom or Electronics screen when at main screen. 

• 
F6 Go to Comments section when at main screen. 

• 
F8 go down one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #2.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
F9 go up one port, for example from Intake on Cyl #3 to Exhaust on Cyl #3.  This can be done at the main screen or from the FlowCom or Electronics screen. 

• 
Esc key to close the FlowCom or Electronics screen and return to main screen. 



(C)Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 


Psuedo (false) Flow Velocity in Figure A15 is the calculated INCOMPRESSIBLE velocity of the air as it passes through the valve.  Some engine builders like to look at these numbers as they make changes to the head flow, cam profile, rod length, etc. HOWEVER, this is NOT the TRUE air speed, because air can compresses and expand, and its density changes with 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 
temperature.  True air speed and tuning details ARE calculated in the Engine Analyzer Pro, which gives a much more realistic idea of what is actually happening. 
Running Tests Where Test Pressure is Changing 
Rather that recording CFM flow data at different valve lifts, you can now choose to test a component at different Test Pressures.  This is a method used for testing devices without various valve lifts, like mufflers, air cleaners, air meters, turbo components, etc. 
Setup the Preferences menu for the appropriate options by clicking on Preferences at the top of the Main Screen.  See Figure A16. 
Allow Test Pressure Set Points must be set to Yes. Automatically Set Test Pressure means you want the Port Flow Analyzer to set the test pressure for each new set point.  This will only work if you have a motor controller.  You may want this turned off if you encounter problems with having the program setting Test Pressure automatically. 
If you want the program to automatically step to the next row with a Set Test Pressure, Choose one of the “Yes” options for “Auto Step Through Test”.  These also let you set the approximate amount of time to stabilize between points. 

Choose the 
Figure A17  Test Options 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1999 Port Flow Analyzer                                  Appendices 
Now you will proceed as with any other type of test, except you (or the Port Flow Analyzer software) will set the test pressure at each different row (test point) to a different number in the “Set Pres” column.  The program will record the actual test pressure (typically quite close to the Set Pres in the “Test Pres” column, and correct the CFM to what it would have been if you had obtained the exact Set Pres. 

If you set the Preference “Auto Step Through Test” to one of the “Yes” options, the program will automatically step to the next row, set the test pressure via the SuperFlow’s Motor Controller through the FlowCom and wait the selected amount of time.  Then the program will automatically record the data and step to the next row.  For this procedure to work best, you should start at the first row.  The sequence is started when you press <F1> or click on the Record menu item.  When all rows with a “Set Pres” have been set and recorded, the focus should return to the first row and auto-stepping will stop. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Appendix 7: New Features in V 3.5 
Port Flow Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v3.0 for Windows. These include 
3.0 A through v3.0 E and now v3.5.  Here is a brief listing of some of the features new since v3.0 E was released, including Version 3.5.  Unless stated, most all of these new features apply Only to the Pro Version of the software: 
New Features: 
• 
The program now has an “EZ Start Wizard” to walk beginners through the steps of starting a new test.  (Fig A20)  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program will automatically look for old v3.0 files and copy them over to this new v3.5. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added several features for emailing graphs, files and PDF reports (if you have the full Adobe Acrobat ™).  (Fig A21) 

• 
Program now has a 'Website' button in the About screen for jumping to www.performancetrends.com website. 

• 
New Preference for Blue and Red text colors in data entry grid on main screen, to better remind user of Intake versus Exhaust data.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Increased the number of possible data points (rows of data) up to 55.  This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
Program now has added a new 'Edit' menu with several Edit options for the Main Screen.  (Fig A22) This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
Program now has added Backup and Restore commands under File at the main screen.  (Fig A22)  This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
Program now has added ability to read WinFlow files from SF 1020 bench, in addition to an SF 600.   

• 
You can now resize the Electronics and FlowCom Recording screen to display these readouts to fill the entire screen, if needed. (Fig A33) This feature is in the Basic version also.. 

• 
The program now warns if you pick an Alternate Folder for Saving in Preferences if the path includes "\PFADAT".  You should be picking the folder which contains the folder "\PFADAT". 

• 
In Head Details screen, the program would not correctly calculating Area or Width and Height for an Oval port. The program assumes Oval if the Width and Height are not the same and "Round" is the port shape described in the Head specs. 

• 
The main screen now displays better for screen resolutions greater than 600 x 800. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
The screen colors are now more compatible with Windows XP. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added a new Port Velocity mode in test options, where you can record 1 pitot tube pressure at every test point.  A new Preference called "Prompt for Recording Single Vel. Pt." was also added to let the program Prompt you for recording a single Pitot Tube velocity reading after you record the CFM readings.  Set this to No and the program records all data AND Pitot Tube velocity at the same time.  Set this to Yes, and the program records all CFM data EXCEPT velocity, then displays a message "Now Record Velocity with <F1>" for about about 1 second, then when you press <F1> again, just the velocity reading is taken.  This data is contained in a data column called “Vel #1”.  This data is graphed vs Lift or L/D if you select to graph a Port Velocity Map, and is included in Report Types of “Raw Data” and “Calculated Data”.  (Fig A23) 

• 
You can save a picture file (like a jpg file) at each lift point, like recording flow patterns with wet flow benches.  (Fig A23) 

• 
You can now search (Filter tests) for certain characters or phrases in the test File Name, in addition to comments, spec settings flow results as available in v3.0. 

• 
Now when you click on a graphed point on the main screen, the row for that data point gets highlighted in the table of results. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program now better remembers the printer type and printer page orientation when you make changes to the Windows Printer Setup.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program now has new preference to let you pick a Company Logo graphics file to appear in your printouts.  The logo prints out in Graph printouts also.  (Fig A25) 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
• Updated the routine to locate an appropriate version of Adobe Acrobat ™ to view the PDF  files for the user manual.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 
New Outputs (Features for Graphs and Reports): 
• Added several new features for doing Cylinder to Cylinder comparison reports.  (Fig A24)  When you choose a 'Cyl-Cyl' report type, three new options appear: 
1. 
Whether to include additional Tests or Heads in the report.  This allows you to compare cylinders from different tests or heads on the same report. 

2. 
Whether to include a difference column to show the difference in the first Column of CFM to all the rest.  This first column could be a single cylinder or the average for the first head. 

3. 
Whether to include averages of the columns at the bottom of each column.  This would be like the average CFM flow at all lifts for each cylinder. 


• 
Program now has added ability to specify which Ports to Graph and/or Report with a new 'Pick' option for Which Cylinders in the 'Graph' and 'Report' Options screens.  (Fig A24) 

• 
Columns in History Log have been slightly rearranged, and columns now include Which Cylinders, which are the cylinders to Report or Graph if you choose the 'Pick' option.  (Fig A24) 

• 
New Format option to Open/Save/Edit a particular graph format.  This allows you to save the graph type, test pressure corrections, graph scales, etc to a particular name.  Then you can easily Open these saved formats to reproduce a graph format in the future.  This is available by clicking on Format, then Open/Save/Edit Graph Format.  (Fig A26) 

• 
User Specified Colors now include colors for Port Velocity Maps.  Click on Preferences, then Set Graph Colors on the right side, then at the bottom right of the Graph Colors screen are the color choices for the Port Velocity Maps. 

• 
Made several changes so Port Velocity maps would show up better on various computer screen resolutions.   

• 
Added several new features for writing ASCII files from reports.  (Fig A29) 


1. 
Report names can now include the path. 

2. 
Now you can browse to find or create a file name and path for writing the ASCII file. 

3. 
ASCII reports can now include comments and all test specifications in the output. 

4. 
Program now remembers ASCII file settings. 


• 
Program now has added several additional graph styles under format, then Line Style.  These include bar graphs, 3D bar graphs, area graphs, etc.  (Fig A27) 

• 
Program now has added "3D-Graphs.clc" calc screen to let user change view and other specs about 3D graphs.  (Fig A28) 

• 
When opening a WinFlow data file, the program now lets you pick the Comments file for this WinFlow file, so those comments can be imported also. 

• 
The Preference which allows you to choose a default Floppy/CD drive has been expanded to include letter drives from A to 

Z. 
This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Changed Preference for Dot Matrix Graph Printer Adjustment to "Graph Printer Adjustment For..." and now have "Acrobat" as a choice. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Put in checks for blank choices in Graph and Report menus.  Blank entries are automatically set to the first choice in the 'Drop Down'. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Made graph line flash rate independent of computer speed (.2 second flash rate). This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Print B&W now draws graph as B&W on screen for better printing on color printers when B&W has been requested. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Program now prints headers of graphs and reports the same, and modifies the spacing to better ensure that long test file names are printed completely.  As mentioned earlier, you can also include a company logo graphic image. 

• 
A new option has been added so reports can be printed WITHOUT the Flow Data.  This allows you to print, for example, just the Head Specs and Head Details with nothing else. This feature is in the Basic version also. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
New Features for Various Flow Benches and Electronics: 
• 
Added some new Flow Bench types and/or features to be more compatible with the following types of Flow Benches. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Performance Trends’ EZ Flow system.  (Fig A32) 

• 
SuperFlow 

• 
FMA Flow Benches from Australia 

• 
Saenz Flow Bench 

• 
Performance Flow and JKM style benches (using Pitot Tubes to record CFM flow) 

• 
Several styles of custom or “do it yourself” flow benches. 

• 
Program now will control Performance Trends’ automatic Valve Opener.  Note:  You will be given a new unlock number for your program to open up the Valve Opener menu option in the Flow Bench specs.  (Fig A30) 

• 
Program is compatible with SuperFlow's ™ new USB FlowCom. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added 3 new Preferences for Pro version only, which allows for there to be both an Intake and Exhaust Test Correction.  A Test Correction is obtained by flowing a known orifice where the head would go on your flow bench.  Knowing the difference between what IS measured and what SHOULD BE measured, a correction is obtained, to put your bench back in Calibration. Now you can do this both in the standard Intake direction AND exhaust direction.  The Preferences menu now contains places for you to enter the expected flow for both the intake and exhaust direction.  Previously, the program used the Superflow SF110 bench standard of 153.2 CFM. 

• 
Program now has added ability to permanently save some debugging settings in the 'Flow Com' or 'Electronics' screen if these debugging settings are fixing a problem.  Click on Options, then the 'Save..' or 'Unsave...' options. 

• 
Program now has added option if FlowCom screen to force FlowCom to change the range of the flow bench.   

• 
If requested Range in Bench Specs is blank, the program now assigns range 1 both in the FlowCom Screen and in the Main Screen grid (spreadsheet). 

• 
Added Calibrate Range screen in Bench Specs for Custom Bench or Performance Trends’ EZ Flow Type flow bench.  By installing and flowing known sharp edged orifices, you can calibrate your bench to match the CFM results of other production flow benches, like a SuperFLow ™ bench.  (Fig A31) 

• 
Program now does more extensive of valid com ports for communicating to a FlowCom or Performance Trends Black Box and Black Box II.  It checks up to Com Port 20, and gives better suggestions at valid ports.  There is also a “Find” button in the Flow Bench specs screen to find your electronics by checking all available Com Ports. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Expanded some allowable ranges for SF300 and SF600 to cover ranges requested by some customers.  Opened up acceptable limits for flow ranges for Custom Bench to 10-5000 CFM. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
New Preference allows you to increase the allowable test and flow pressure inputs up to 1000 each. 

• 
Program now allows printing of Calibrations screen. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Rearranged Troubleshooting options in FlowCom/Electronics screen to be under Help.  This allows more room for features to be listed under Options. This feature is in the Basic version also. 


New Features Specific to the Black Box II: 
• 
Program now has added option for Recording Switch for Black Box II.  Click on Options in the Electronics screen, then Foot Switch Enabled to turn on this option.  Then click on Options in the Electronics screen again, BB2 Foot Switch, then pick which Temperature channel to have the switch come in on.  The Black Box II can read both temperature and the foot switch from the 4 pin analog inputs on its side. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added 2 new Troubleshooting Options, of Test Com Ports and Check Boot Message. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Made major change to EZ Flow flow bench calibration to work with new Black Box II.  (Fig A32)  This feature is in the Basic version also. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
• 
Program now does better checks for bad data from Black Box II.  This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added new option for Preference of 'Black Box Reads +/- Pressure' but the program does no checks to see if the direction of the flow is correct for the type of port, intake and exhaust.  Setting “Black Box Reads +/- Pressure” means a custom bench does not need valves to maintain the high pressure side of the manometer to remain the high pressure side of the manometer when you switch from the Intake to the Exhaust flow direction.  This greatly simplifies the design of “do it yourself” and custom benches. 

• 
Fixed bug where if the program is set to 'Black Box Reads +/- Pressure', CFM was being displayed even if the Vertical Manometer reading was less than 2" water. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added Preference for Barometer sensor in Black Box II.  To get Barometer reading with Black Box II, you must turn on the Preference "Black Box II has Baro Sensor" and also ask to record Barometer in the Test Conditions screen. You can also adjust the Barometer reading slightly with the Weather Calibration section in the Calibrations screen available by clicking on the Calibrations button at the lower left corner of the Flow Bench Specs screen.  The Barometer input in this screen will offset the Black Box's barometer reading.  For example, enter -.25 and the Black Box's Barometer will be reduced by .25 inches of Mercury. 

• 
Program now has added checks for Black Box or EZ Flow systems to watch for over-ranging the pressure sensors, producing inaccurate data. For example, if a pressure sensor is “maxed out”, the program tells you this, rather than letting you think this data point is accurate. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Fixed a bug where the Black Box could read test pressure incorrectly for certain faster computers. This feature is in the Basic version also. 

• 
Added a Preference to Eliminate program looking for Black Box set up for + or – pressure. 


New Engine Performance Report Features (Pro Version Only): 
• 
Program now comes with almost 1000 more example cam profiles built in, including almost the entire Crane catalog. 

• 
Program now offers to fill in blank Engine Specs. 

• 
Program now allows for Rocker Arm Ratios of less than 1, down to .7 

• 
Fixed a bug where if you chose a different Cam Advance in the Engine Specs screen, it would blank out and revert back to straight up. 

• 
Fixed a bug where if you chose something other that .050" events in the Engine Specs screen (.040" or seat timing), the program would always open up the Engine Specs screen with .050" as the labels for cam events. 

• 
Fixed bug where VERY high runner velocities (small ports) could erroneously produce good HP. 

• 
Engine Performance Estimate report now uses Metric Units if Metric units are chosen in Preferences. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 





Figure A25 Print Options and History Log for Printing Report from Figure A24 
In Preferences, set text to be included in Printouts. 
Use Browse button to find your graphics file on this computer. 
Graphics file is drawn here on printed reports. 
In History Log, put a Yes in the “Report” column for tests you want to include in this report. 
Click in the “Cyls to Report” to assign which cylinders to include in the “Cyl-Cyl Comparison” report. 
Two lines of text from Preferences is printed here in printouts. 
Cyl-Cyl Comparison Head Summaries is given here. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 








(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Appendix 9: New Features in v3.5 B 
Port Flow Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v3.0 for Windows. These include 
3.0 A through v3.0 E, v3.5 and now v3.5 B. For the features added to the v3.5, refer to the Readme.doc file (click on Help, then Display Readme.doc File) in the program.  Listed here are features introduced in v3.5 B.  Also, v3.5 B has a more advanced version we call “Head Porter”. So now there are 3 versions of Port Flow Analyzer: 
• 
Basic Version 

• 
Professional (Pro) Version (includes all Basic features and more advanced Pro features) 

• 
Head Porter Version (includes all Professional features and more advanced Head Porter features) Here is a listing of the major enhancements and new features for v3.5 B. 


Data Recording: 
In Test Options, you can now select to record port velocity data at 3 depths in the port.  See Figure A41, 47.  Head Porter only. 
Several enhancements to Port Velocity Report for Head Porter version have been added, to allow more averaging for all possible combinations of recording port velocity.  See Figure A42.  Head Porter only. 
A new Preference to allow for English units of CFM, Deg F, inches of water pressure, etc.  but mm valve, lift and engine dimensions has been added.  See Figure A43.  Head Porter only. 
The Electronics or FlowCom screen has been enlarged in its default setting.  You can still enlarge to most any size you want by turning on the appropriate Preference setting.  See Figure A43-B.   All versions. 
You can now include a “gauge” (bar graph) for some readings on the Electronics or FlowCom screen.  This gives you a graphical representation of the stability of the readings and if the readings are going higher or lower than expected values.  See Figure A43-B.   Head Porter only. 
Data Analysis (including Graphs and Reports): 
You can create custom, user defined graphs, where you choose what data gets included.  For example, you can graph CFM and Swirl and % Exh/Int on the same graph.  See Figure A44, A45.  Head Porter only. 
Program now allows for graphing Flow results corrected to 2 different test pressures.  See Figure A46.  Head Porter only. 
You have several options to allow for more options for doing Port Velocity Graphs.  This is an extension to the feature to be able to record Port Velocity for many more data points.  See Figure A47.  Head Porter only. 
You can now specify if you want the Test Piece picture to be drawn smaller in printouts in portrait mode.  (See “Other” category for Test Piece picture.) This can allow for more printed text to be included with the graph on 1 page.  NOTE: In landscape mode, the Test Piece picture is always drawn small on the same line as the test title.  The Test Piece picture can also be printed in reports.  See Figure A48.  Head Porter only. 
You can now select a single cylinder to make graphs which require a valve lift profile, like Flow Area and Pseudo Flow Velocity.  In previous versions, only the Average Flow for the entire head was used.  Head Porter only. 
You can now request the graph to be printed in a smaller height.  This can allow for more printed text to be included with the graph on 1 page. See Figure A49.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
You can now select a Preference to have the graph NOT autoscale when you first open it.  This can be handy if you are using some pre-defined scales and want to keep them for all graphs.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Added a graph line thickness between Thin and Thick, called Thin 'Plus'.  See Figure A50.  All versions. 
The graph line styles in the drop down menu of line thicknesses are listed together, with the appropriate check mark by the type currently used.  See Figure A50.  All versions. You can now select larger legends (labels) in the graph screen.  See Figure A50.  Pro and Head Porter only. Added label to better explain what cylinder or that Average of All Cylinders will be used for Flow Area and Pseudo Flow 
Velocity graphs.  Pro and Head Porter only. The graph screen now should more completely fill the available screen in most all situations.  All versions. Improved appearance of some printed graphs, especially in Landscape orientation.  Previously the graphs had a border drawn 
around them.  On the left side, the border could be broken.  On the right side the legend (labels) could also be distorted.  Now 
the border is not drawn in those locations.  See Figure A49.  All versions. The graph choices have been simplified by eliminating many of the Int, Exh, and Int & Exh choices into just 1 choice.  Now the program looks to a separate input of "Port to Graph" for this setting Int, Exh, and Int & Exh choices.  See Figure A45. All versions. 
Fixed bug where the Port Velocity Map was not being graphed correctly.  Pro and Head Porter only. Made Overlap Graphs go to zero at start and beginning of graph to look more correct.  Pro and Head Porter only. Fixed bug where graphs for % Exh/Int only showed the first cylinder on the head even though you requested all cylinders to be 
graphed. Pro and Head Porter only. 
Added menu command 'Edit Printed Comments & Data Output' under the File option on the Graph screen in the printing options section.  Pro and Head Porter only. Program now includes more example cam files, the same files included in the new Engine Analyzer v3.4.  See Figure A51.  Pro 
and Head Porter only. 
Hardware: 
Pro version now allows for Performance Trends’ motor controller to be used.  See Figure A52.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
Program now allows for a USB switch to be used for starting to record data.  This option does not present conflicts with some features of the SuperFlow Flowcom.  This is done buy purchasing the proper switch from Performance Trends, then going into FlowCom or Electronics screen, clicking on Options at the top, then select the USB Switch Option.  You must also set the proper Com Port for the USB Switch under this option also.  See Figure A53.  All versions. 
In the Bench Specs screen, the program now allows for Valve Opener for any Pro version.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
Added Hot Wire (hot wire anemometer mass air flow sensor) as a Custom Bench Type.  See Figure A54.  All versions. 
Other: 
The program now lets you "Filter" tests in the library for finding tests of a certain date, certain file name, etc.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
When quitting program and you select 'Cancel' for Saving Changes to current test file, now the program keeps program open. 
Before v3.5B, it continued shutting down.  All versions. The option for using a 2 pulse swirl meter, to be read directly with a FlowCom (no Performance Trends electronics) has been added. In addition, a special calibration factor for this 2 Blade Swirl meter is also possible.  Pro and Head Porter only. 
Fixed bug where reports may be requested for intake and exhaust ports, but only intake ports were reported.  All versions. 
Fixed bug where the cylinders you may "Pick" for a report were not being shown clearly (another input was in front of it).  All versions. Fixed bug where FlowCom/Electronics screen could be off screen too high or too far to left.  All versions. Fixed bug where Test Comments were not being shown in the Preview when opening some older Port Flow files.  All versions.  Updated a text file to more accurately show Mass Flow correctly for gm/sec and lb/min, and correct for proper air density specs.  
Pro and Head Porter only. 
Program now hides the 'Range' column for bench types which have only 1 range, like EZ Flow, JKM, new Hot Wire, and LFE.    See Figure A55.  All versions. Program now shows the Company Logo graphic on the main screen.  See Figure A55.  Pro and Head Porter only. Added option to include a Test Piece Pic with your data file.  This could be of the head, carb, etc.  It is displayed on the main 
screen and in printouts if you choose to included it from the "Print Options" list (graphs and reports).  See Figure A55.  Head Porter only. Program no longer 'nags' as much about using the CFM at 0 lift as Leakage.  All versions. New Example Flow Files have been added to show new features. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007  Port Flow Analyzer  Appendicies  
Figure A42 Port Velocity Reports  Last columns of report  

First columns of report 
No letter indicates depth “C” for depth C 
Averages for
Choose this 
depths A
Report Type 
(blank), B and C 
Bottom rows of report. 
Averages for all valve lifts at each position and depth across all 
t 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 



Figure A43-B Bar Gauges for Selected Readings. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A44 Custom, User Defined Graphs 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A46 Custom Graph at 2 Test Pressures Choose Corr. CFM vs Lift ONLY. Note, correcting to 2 test pressures only works for this data type. 
Set this to Yes. 
Select the Second Test Pressure you want the data corrected to. Note: The First Test Pressure is set as “New Int Test Pres, ‘’water” on the left side. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 







Figure A50 New Graph Features: Line Thickness and Larger Legends 

Various combinations of line thickness and Legend Size 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A51 More Example Cams for Engine Specs Screen 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2007 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 



Figure A54 New Bench Type: Hot Wire Anemometer 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Appendix 10: New Features in v3.5 C 
Port Flow Analyzer has had many updates since this user manual was written for the original v3.0 for Windows. These include 
3.0 A through v3.0 E, v3.5 A, v3.5 B and now v3.5 C. For the features added to the v3.5 B since Appendix 9 was written, refer to the Readme.doc file (click on Help, then Display Readme.doc File) in the program.  Listed here are features introduced in v3.5 C: 
• 
Basic Version 

• 
Professional (Pro) Version (includes all Basic features and more advanced Pro features) 

• 
Head Porter Version (includes all Basic and Professional features and more advanced Head Porter features) 


Here is a listing of the major enhancements and new features for v3.5 C. 
Data Recording: 
There is now an option under Velocity in the Recording screen for producing different pitch sounds for the port velocity.  This way you can listen to the port velocity change as you move your pitot tube or Electronic Velocity Probe in the port.  Now you can concentrate on exactly where the probe is and hear if that area has high or low velocity.  Head Porter Version only.  Fig A56. 
The program now has several new features for reading swirl and tumble.  Fig A56. 
• 
The program now saves individual USB Swirl Readings and checks them to see if there are any outliers (outside 25% of the average). If there are any of these readings, they are omitted and a new average and spread (+/- %) is calculated. 

• 
You can now pick from 3 different analog swirl meter inputs for the new USB Black Box.   

• 
The program now disables menu item Micro USB Swirl Version if you have not checked Micro USB Swirl as the type of Swirl Meter.   

• 
The program is now more reliable at realizing Swirl readings were not being recorded, and eliminated checking swirl settings "behind the scenes". 

• 
Now there is an option under Swirl/Tumble in Calibrations screen of None to turn off Swirl and Tumble features.  

• 
Program now checks to see if USB Swirl Meter and Logger (SF Flowcom, Black Box, etc) are using same Com Port and warns you of conflict. 

• 
If you are not recording either Swirl or Tumble, the “Rezero Swirl/Tumble” option in the Recording screen is not shown. Fig A59. 


The program now displays message only once for each program startup that the units are not matching between the Flowcom and the program’s settings. 
Program now records only 1 reading for Port Velocity reading if you are using a FlowCom and was having the FlowCom doing "slower, more reliable" communications via a Preference Setting.  This speeds up testing when recording slowly.   
The program now better averages data readings you are using a FlowCom and was having the FlowCom doing "slower, more reliable" communications via a Preference Setting to speed up testing. 
Program now fixes corrupt FlowCom strings when checking for flow bench type.   
Added option in FlowCom or Electronics screen to allow displaying of the Actual CFM (not corrected for test pressure). If you request 'Show Actual CFM', the Corrected CFM is displayed in a slightly smaller font, and the Actual CFM (not corrected for test pressure) is displayed in an even smaller font below it.  Pro and Head Porter version only.  Fig A63. 
The program now has a lower limit for displaying live CFM reading for some types of loggers.  Note that the correct data was recorded and displayed if you recorded the data point, it was just not displayed in the FlowCom or Electronics screen.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
The program now more reliably lets you know the pressure sensors are maxed out (producing incorrect data) for the new Black Box Mini USB.  Fig A58. 
Data Analysis (including Graphs and Reports): 
Program now has a Printed Data option for printing the actual Port Velocity numbers on the Port Velocity Maps.  Click on File, then "Edit Printed Comments and Data Output" and check "Include Port Vel. Map Numbers".  Head Porter Version only.  Fig A62. 
Fixed bug where the averages for the Exhaust data in reports could be done incorrectly.  Intake data was always OK.   
The limits for the bar gauges in the Recording Screen for the Head Porter version are now set in Preferences, under the “Printing/Graphing” tab. Before this they were set in the Recording Screen, but this was unreliable because of communications taking place with a data logger. Fig A59. 
You can now include a graph or “live data” on the Recording Screen to track trends in several variables during testing. Head Porter Version only.    Fig A63. 
There is now a Preference setting to let you keep the Graph on the main screen always at the same graph scales.  This can cause problems if you open files with different lifts and flows than you normally run, or the heads you flow produce quite different flows.  However, if your tests are always at about the same lift and flow, this new Preference makes it easier to spot changes with the graph on the main screen.  Pro and Head Porter Version only.    Fig A64. 
Hardware: 
For our EZ Flow systems, there is a new feature letting you add a special “Low Flow” sensor.  This lets you measure very low flows to check for leakage or for measuring flows on very small components or at very low valve lifts.  Head Porter Version only.    Fig A65, A66. 
Added option in FlowCom screen to set the Delay Time for turning the SF1020 motor on/off if doing flow range change or flow direction change.  Fig A59. 
FlowCom screen lets you change the flow direction for the SF1020 bench.  Fig A59. 
If you use a recording switch in a temperature channel AND use the same channel for recording temperature, the "temperature" which is considered pressing the Record Switch has been lowered from about 158 deg F down to about 150 deg F.  This better ensure the system will see the recording switch, but can create problems if you are trying to record temperatures which are close to 150 deg F (extremely unusual condition).   
Emailing and File Handling: 
Under 'File', then 'Save As' there are new options to see other files in each folder, then choose a name from the folder to make it easy to modify a new name based on a previously used name.  There is also a new "Add New" button to easily add a new folder name.  Fig A67. 
Under 'File', then 'Save As' there is a new “Edit Many Tests” button.  This allows you to identify many tests, by using the Ctrl key when clicking on a test, or clicking on a test, then hold the shift key to click on another test and identify all the tests in between.  Then you can choose to Delete these tests (actually send to recycle bin), or copy or move these tests to a different folder.  If you choose ‘Move’ they are removed from the current folder.  Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A69. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
There is a new Open option of "List by Access Date".  With this activated, the most recent test files you have worked with show up at the top of the list.  Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A73. 
Many screens now allow for much longer folder and file names.  These include the “Open a File”, “Save As”,  “Starting a New Test”, Filtered Files displayed in Notepad, etc. 
Now using the Filter Files option, you can select which folders to check when you click "Print list of all files fitting these conditions".  Pro and Header Porter versions only. 
Replaced "Copy" with "Copy (or Merge)" to list of Folder Options possible in 'Save As' screen. 
Program can now better display PDFs like the users manual in some versions of Windows 10.  Related to this, there is a new button in Preferences for "Look for New Adobe Acrobat Reader".  This way you can manually browse your computer to find the program you want to use for displaying PDFs.  Fig A64. 
Made several refinements to printouts and displaying screens, especially if you were including a company logo or a Test Piece picture.   
There is a new Edit option of Combine Tests.  It lets you combine 2 or more tests into 1.  Header Porter versions only.    Fig A60, A61. 
Files and folders you delete now are actually sent to the Recycle Bin so they can be recovered later if you want.  Fig A68. 
The program is better at adding numbers to the end of file names by default.  Now it will add 3 digits, like “testname001” so that you can record up to 1000 files with the base name “testname”.  Prior to this it would just default to “testname1”. 
Now when you open a file which has a Graph Name specified in the History Log, that Graph Name stays with the file.  Previously it was restored to the default as being the File Name.   
The program now has several enhancements for automatically emailing files, reports and graphs.  Many of these are required to work with newer OSs, like Win 7 and Win 10.  Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A71, A72.  These include 
• 
Program now has an 'Email Report' option in the Report screen under 'File' to explain how to email a report.  There is also a new 'Emailing' option at the top of the Reports screen explaining different emailing options for reports. 

• 
Under 'File' on the Reports screen, there is now a check box for emailing the ASCII file to an email address after it has been written. 

• 
There is a new option in Preferences to manually locate "Location of PDF Printer Output File".  This is needed in newer OSs where the PDF printer can be unpredictable.   

• 
Now if you cancel the process of printing a PDF file for a report and emailing it, the process stops and does not proceed through to the Emailing screen.   


After making a report, the File option for creating an ASCII text file has a new option.  It is for making a .csv file which is compatible with Microsoft Excel. Pro and Header Porter versions only.  Fig A72. 
Other: 
The Main Screen graph now has a title and a description of test pressure.  Fig A61. The program now better handles the Preference Setting "Early (pre 1998) FlowCom?" when it is set to "No". There is now a button in Preferences to explain how the weather corrections are used and when they are needed. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Program now explains why changes in 'Starting a New Test' screen are not saved if you don't start a new test.   
If you change the printer within the program to something other than the computer's default printer, the program now restores the default printer (and printer orientation) when it shuts down.   
The program is now be more reliable at opening pages on the internet for a wider range in internet browsers.   
The main screen is refreshed any time you resize it.  This way all parts of the main screen displayed when you make a change.  Prior to this, you may not see all parts of the main screen until you went into a different screen and then returned to the main screen. 
Program now displays a Progress Bar when looking for Com Ports so you know something is happening when it is checking.  The program is now also less likely to say Com 3 is a correct Com Port, when it actually is not the correct port. 
Program as an improved method for "Force These Lifts" button in Test Options screen, where extra rows are not blanked out and program checks if you want increments of Lift or L/D (previously was just Lift).   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A56 Sound to Indicate Port Velocity 


Visit our website page www.performancetrends.com. Then click on Support at the top, then Movie Demo Files for our movies page to watch and hear how this feature works. There is also a link on that page to visit our youtube page, where the movies may play better for a wider range of computers. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 





Figure A60 New Edit Feature to Combine 2 Tests into 1 Test File 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A61 New Edit Feature to Combine 2 Tests into 1 Test File, cont 
Find the test file you want to combine with the current test you started the “Combine” process with. 
Then click the “Combine” button to complete the process. 
After the Combine edit of combining the original test with cylinders 1,3,5,7 with a test with cylinders 2,4,6,8 you now have a test file with cylinders 1 through 8. 
Graph now shows the port identification and the pressure the data is corrected to. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A62 Including Port Velocity Numbers on Printed Port Velocity Maps 
Click here under File in the Port Velocity Map Graph screen. 
If you have Head Porter version you can check this option box. 
Printouts will now include the exact Port Velocity number at each position you recorded. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A63 Include Graph on Recording Screen and Display Actual CFM 


The limits you set for the particular data you want on the graph are the same as the bar graph for that data. These limits are now set in Preferences. See Figure A59.  
Actual CFM is being shown here in a smaller font, below the Corrected CFM. Note that the Corrected CFM is higher because the Actual Test Pressure of 5.84 is less than the desired Test Pressure of 10. The program is correcting the Actual CFM up to what it should be if the Test Pressure was actually 10.  

You can also click here to turn off the graph.  
Graph being drawn as you watch readings in the Recording screen.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A64 New Preference Settings 
Several other settings for the graph on the main screen were moved down on this tab (page) to be grouped together. 
This button lets you browse your computer to find Acrobat Reader for displaying PDF files, like the User Manual. 
Three new Preference settings for the graph scales on the main screen. Choose Auto-Scaling to have the graphs automatically scaled to match the data for a particular test. This was the method done before this Preference was added. 
With the settings shown in Preferences screen above, the graph for this particular head is shown with good detail. If the next head you flow has significantly higher flow, it will be easier to spot because the graph scales stay the same. 
Scales were set for 200 CFM and .500” lift, which are too small for this data.  If your results change a lot, select “Auto-Scaling” to avoid this problem 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A65 EZ Flow with Low Flow Sensor 
Low Flow sensor for 4” EZ Flow. 
Low Flow sensor installed with flow straighteners both before and after it for optimum accuracy. 
Each graph below is for 4 repeat tests where the CFM was changed from 0 CFM at the 0 lift point linearly up to 45 CFM at the 1.0 lift point on an SF300 flow bench on range 2.  This 4” EZ Flow system has a max flow capability of 400 CFM.  With perfect results, we would see a 
perfectly straight line from 0 to 45 CFM. 
With the Low Flow Sensor option, the flow results are accurate all the way down to 0 CFM flow. 
With the standard EZ Flow system without the Low Flow Sensor option, the results are quite scattered below about 15 CFM. Many times you want to measure low flow to check for leakage or to measure flow at low valve lifts. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A66 EZ Flow with Low Flow Sensor, cont 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A67 New “Save As” Features 
Click on File, then Save As 
Click this Check Box for new info and options. Many times you may want to see what other files are in this same folder, or use one of these file names as the New Test Name, or possibly modify that name slightly. 
Here we are listing Test Files alphabetically by name. 
Using the Picked  
Choose a Test name from  name and then  
the list, then click here to  modifying it slightly.  
copy that name to the New  
Test Name field.  

Listing by Date 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A68 Saving Deleted Files and Folders to Recycle Bin 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A69 New “Edit Many” Feature 
New button option under File, then Open… Click it for a new screen shown to the right. 
This screen lets you highlight many files at once. Click one to highlight it and then hold down the <Shift> key and click another file and all files listed in between are highlighted. Or click on files one at a time while holding the <Ctrl> key to select or de-select files one at a time.  
Once files are selected, click one of these 4 buttons for the action. “Move” means the files will be removed from the existing location.  

If you selected Copy or Move, the program will ask you to choose a Folder to Copy or Move the files to.  In this example, we chose to ‘Move” the files highlighted, and chose choose the folder “Harley” as shown below. 
The Gautama folder shows the files selected 
If you click on the Harley are now gone. 
folder you will see the 5 files selected moved there. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 



Figure A71 New Emailing Features, cont 
Once Acrobat is shut down, enter “Email to:”, and message, and other info here, then click the Send button. 
If you set the Preference of “Browse to PDF File When Emailing It” to Yes, this message will appear. Click OK to proceed to locating the PDF file for emailing. 
Many times Acrobat will open the PDF file to display it, as shown here. As this message describes, if the Port Flow program senses Acrobat has this file  open, you MUST shut down Acrobat or Acrobat Reader to release the PDF file for emailing. Once you do this, click OK on this message to continue. 
Browse to the PDF file, then click Open. 
Emailing screen after finding and “opening” the PDF file. 
Message that email and PDF file have been sent. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A72 New Export a Report as an Excel File Click on File at the top of the Report screen to export an ASCII text file of the report. 
New option to export as a .csv file which can be open with Microsoft Excel. 
New option to automatically email the ASCII file you create. 
If the File Name you specify does not end with a .csv extension, one will be added automatically. 
File is created and Excel is the default program to open it. 
Port Flow Report data opened up in Excel. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Figure A73 List Files by Access Date 
Choose this option and the files will be listed by the date they were last modified or opened. 
With this option checked, you will see the date listed here, with the tests with the most recent date listed at the top. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2018 Port Flow Analyzer Appendicies 
Roll Center Calculator for Windows 
User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
2 
Performance Trends, Inc.   PO 530164, Livonia, MI 48153 Tech Help for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230  Fax: 248-442-7750    Email:  feedback@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice Copyright (C) 1998 Performance Trends, Inc.    All Rights Reserved 
These software programs and user's manual are reserved by Performance Trends, Inc. and are intended for the use of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. 
Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp. 1993 All Rights Reserved 
International Business Machines Corp. makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, regarding the enclosed computer package, its merchantability or its fitness for any particular purpose.   IBM PC, XT, and AT are registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corp. 
DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION OF FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE OF SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY OF OBLIGATION OF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES.  PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
Continued on next page. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS OF PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS OF ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
********************************** W A R N I N G *********************************** The Roll Center Calculator makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with vehicles and suspensions.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-
     Obtaining data to input to the program 

-
     Interpreting the program's results 


Before making measurements of or modifications to any suspension, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO:
 -
     Regard the safety consequences

 -
     Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 

-
     Read the entire user's manual

 -
     Obey all federal, state & local laws

 -
     Respect the rights and safety of others 


Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
   1.1 Overview of Features 
1 
   1.2 Before You Start                                         
2 
   1.3 A Word of Caution                                        
3 
   1.4 Getting Started (Installation)                           4 
   1.5 Example to Get You Going                                 5 
Chapter 2 Definitions 13 
   2.0 Basic Program Operation                                  13 
   2.1 Main Screen Inputs & Outputs                             15 
2.1.1 Static Layout Dimensions 15 
2.1.2 Other Dimensions & Specs 21 
2.1.2 Show Dive & Roll 23 
2.1.3 Suspension Layout Drawing 25 
2.2 Main Screen Options 27 
2.3 Camber Table & Graph 33 
Appendix 1  "Rules of Thumb" for Desired Roll Center, 39 Camber and Camber Gain 
Index 41 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features  
The Roll Center Calculator program by Performance Trends, Inc. is software to let circle track racers, road racers, engineers, and performance enthusiasts understand, tune and even design front suspensions. Its many features include: 
Features: 
• 
Mouse driven user interface compatible with Windows and Window 95 for easy operation and better print capability. 

• 
Automatically updates the drawing, Roll Center, Camber and Camber Gain as you change inputs, or select various amounts of  Dive and Roll.  You actually watch the car Dive and Roll just like an animation. 

• 
Displays Spring Compression so you know what the springs are doing during Dive and Roll. 

• 
For Double A Arm suspensions, you can shim the upper arms in or out and watch the effect on Camber. 

• 
For McPherson Strut suspensions, you can move the top of the strut in or out and watch the effect on Camber. 

• 
Several of example front suspensions preloaded for you to pick from. 

• 
Different ways for you to enter some measurements, either X and Y coordinates or length and angle of arms. 

• 
The Draw Big option to see the suspension components in greater detail. 

• 
Option to draw in imaginary Extension Lines to show how the Instant Centers and Roll Center are determined. 

• 
Displays a table of Camber for various increments of Dive and Roll, increments which you can change.  You can also include a Baseline condition (suspension setup) for comparison. 

• 
You can graph the Camber Table. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• 
IBM  386, 486, or Pentium (or 100% compatible). 

• 
4 Meg of RAM. 

• 
Approximately 5 Megabyte of disk space. 

• 
Windows v3.1 or Windows 95. 

• 
Windows Compatible Printer (optional). 


Many terms used by the Roll Center Calculator and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, like Camber Gain, Instant Center, etc.  However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Roll Center Calculator. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Roll Center Calculator directory or folder.   
To read this file in Windows 3.1, double click on Notepad in the Accessories program group. Then click on File, then Open and select All Files for the file type.  Find the Roll Center Calculator directory, usually RC under PERFTRNS.PTI, and click on README.DOC. Notepad will display the contents. 
To read this file in Windows 95, use Windows Explorer to find the Roll Center Calculator directory, usually RC under PERFTRNS.PTI.  Then double click on README.DOC.  Wordpad will display the contents. 
Every effort has been made by Performance Trends, Inc to provide you with an accurate, cost saving, high quality tool at a very reasonable price.  We do not copy protect our software, to allow our customers full freedom to make back-up copies for their own personal use.  Please respect the programmer's copyright and do NOT give out copies to your friends. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
The Roll Center Calculator is a comprehensive software package which estimates a suspension's motion based on limited user input.  These estimates can be used for suspension analysis and tuning.  However, a suspension is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible. Therefore, several simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level. The user must recognize: 
The software can not predict the safety of a suspension modification or driving situation.  Done correctly, with the proper quality parts and safety precautions, extreme racing conditions can be safe.  Done  by inexperienced racers with standard or low quality parts, a race car can be a "disaster waiting to happen".  Please read and follow any "Safety Notes" as highlighted in this manual. 
The software, like any computer model, can NOT make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software is estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions within the program will limit the accuracy.  These assumptions include that there is no flex in the suspension arms or bushings. 

• 
Tire characteristics, driver performance, track conditions, etc. are rarely constant and repeatable. 

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help you understand how a suspension works; what parameters are important, how parameters interact, what are the tradeoffs, etc. 

• 
Point you in the correct, general direction for making modifications. This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, race results, books, etc.  Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense to you. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all your data input. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Computer programs are written by normal people who can make mistakes.  It's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your phone call may help us correct it.) 


Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope.  Also see Appendix 1 for general tips on  “optimum” suspension settings and how there is little agreement on what is actually “optimum”. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Roll Center Calculator from the distribution CD to a hard drive before it will run. To do this in Windows 95, 98, Me, NT, 2000: 
• 
Start your computer. 

• 
Insert the distribution CD into the CD drive.  The Installation Wizard should AutoStart where you can select to install the Roll Center Calculator or any other of our programs in demo mode. 

• 
If the Installation Wizard does not Auto Start, then click on Start, then Run, then Browse. 

• 
Browse until you find your CD rom drive, then the Setup.exe file on the CD. 

• 
Double Click on Setup.exe and then click on OK back at the Run screen to run Setup.exe. 


Follow the instructions of the SETUP program.  For most users, just click on OK for each question asked to accept the default answers suggested by the Setup program.  Once you have installed the Roll Center Calculator, there should be a Perf. Trends icon or program group for you to click on.  Otherwise, use Explorer to find the RC folder under the PERFTRNS.PTI folder and click on the RC-32.EXE program.  Also see section 1.5, next page. 
Entering Registered Owner's Name: 
During your first setup, the Roll Center Calculator will ask you to enter your name as the Registered Owner.  During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied.  Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card. 
Click on About in the Main Menu to review your name and code # . 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Roll Center Calculator from Windows 3.1, click on the Roll Center Calculator icon in the Perf.Trnds program group.  From Windows 95, click on Start, then Programs, then Perf. Trends, and then Roll Center Calculator. 

You will notice that a message appears which says you can Open some saved suspension measurements by clicking on File and then Open.  This opens the Suspension Library, which has some example suspensions stored in it right from Performance Trends.  Click on OK for this message and the other introductory messages you are shown to get to a screen which looks similar to Figure 1. 
From this main menu, you can: 
• Enter or edit any of the measurements and specifications displayed, and watch calculated specs and the layout drawing be updated automatically. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
• 
Open or Save a file of complete measurements by clicking on the File menu item, then either Open, Save or Save As. 

• 
Add, edit or review comments to describe the measurements currently displayed in the program.   

• 
Produce various amounts of suspension Dive and Roll and watch Camber, Roll Center and Spring Compression change 

• 
Change the Options to somewhat customize the program for you. 

• 
Get Help to explain these options by clicking on Help or pressing <F1>.  Help definitions are also available anytime you click on an input spec’s name or input box or a calculated spec name or value.  See Figure 1.3 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapter 2. 
At the top of the main menu, the blue title bar shows the current Suspension is [ untitled ], which means the current specs displayed have not been saved to the Suspension Library.  This makes sense since all the measurements are blank.  So lets do what the introductory message said, and open a Suspension file.  Click on File in the upper left corner, then select Open.  See Figure 1.  You will obtain a screen like Figure 2 of the Suspension Library, which lists all files of suspension measurements which have been saved.  These have been saved by Performance Trends for your convenience at getting familiar with the program. 
Figure 1.2  Suspension Library (standard Windows File Screen) 

For beginner users, do NOT click on these boxes. However, for advanced users familiar with Windows, you can change the directory (folder) or disk drive to look for files here. 
Files are arranged alphabetically.  Click on a file to Open here, then click on the OK button (or double click on file name to Open in one operation). 
Click on “dbl-aarm” to Open a set of measurements for a typical double A-arm suspension.  The Suspension Library disappears and the Main Screen returns with measurements loaded for all specs.  If 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
some measurement is not familiar to you, click on its name or the spec and a brief description appears in the Help frame, along with a page #  from this manual for more help. 

Changing Specs:  Enter X&Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Joints Option 
First, lets try changing a measurement.  For example, lets raise the ball joint on the right upper control arm 1/2 inch.  This would mean the Right(Height) measurement for Upper Ball Joint (the distance from the ground) would increase .5 inches.  So change 20 to 20.5.  When you get ready to press <enter> after typing in 20.5, watch the drawing, especially the right side suspension at point A and Camber Gain.  (Remember, this is a front view, so the right side of the car is actually on the left side of the screen.) 
Important:  Always remember you are looking at a Front view of the car. This means the Right side of the screen actually shows the Left side of the car and the Left side of the screen shows the Right side of the car. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 

Press <enter> and notice how Camber gain changed from -1.20 to -1.32.  This minor change will produce slightly more negative Camber Gain, which means the right tire will see slightly more negative camber for the same amount of Dive in the corner or during braking.  You will notice that Stc (static) Camber (in the Other Dimensions & Specs at the right side of the screen) changed from -3 to -2.89 degrees. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 

You will also notice that the Length and Angle of the Upper Arm (printed in light gray in the lower left corner changed from 11.88 inches to 12.02 and 
14.62 degrees to 16.93.  You might be thinking that the only way for the length of the arm to change is by installing a different arm, which is correct.  What we simulated was raising the Upper Ball Joint and adjusting the length and angle of the upper arm so the Frame Pivot would stay in the same spot. 
If you click on Options at the top of the Main Screen you will see that the first option (Enter X&Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Joints) is checked.  This means you enter the X and Height readings of both ends of the arms, and the length is calculated from those readings.  If you select its alternate option (Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle), then you could change the Height at the Upper Ball Joint and the mount at the frame would change as necessary to hold the length of the arm and its angle constant.  You could then change the Angle of the arm to produce most any X or Height at the Frame Mount. 
Changing Specs:  Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle Option 
Lets try this.  Click somewhere outside the menu choices of Figure 1.5  to close these choices without changing them.  Then click on the 20.5 and type in 20 and press <enter> to return it to its original value.  Camber Gain should go back to -1.20 and Stc (static) Camber should go back to -3. 
Now click on Options and then on the Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle option. You will be given the notice shown in Figure 1.6 and see that the Upper and Lower Arm Dim. (“Dim.” is an abbreviation for “dimensions”) are now enabled so you can enter them directly.  The Upper Frame Mount and Lower Ball Joint inputs are disabled (printed in light gray), meaning these values will be calculated from the other inputs. You may notice that the  Height of the Upper Frame Mount and Lower Ball Joint change slightly, from 17 to 17.01 and 4 to 3.99 which is due to slightly rounding differences in the math. This hundredth inch difference will not produce any significant error in the results.  See Figure 1.7. 
Now change the Upper Ball Joint Height from 20 to 20.5 and press <enter>.  Notice how the Length of the arm stays at 11.88 inches and the Angle stays at 14.62 degrees. Frame Pivot X and Height have changed as they would in order to keep the length and angle constant.  Stc Camber changes just as it did before to -2.89 because the Ball Joint has moved the same as before.  However the Camber Gain now is 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 

Joint Height to 20.5. 
The choice of which of these options you use (Enter X&Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Joints or Enter X&Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle) can have a significant effect on how your inputs affect other specs.  Use the one which makes the most sense for the type of modification you are trying to simulate. 
Show Dive & Roll 
Now click on the Yes option for Show Dive and Roll.  You will see the Dive and Roll text and arrow boxes become enabled so you can enter a certain amount of vehicle Dive in inches and Roll in degrees. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
The arrow boxes let you increment Dive and Roll up and down by clicking on the appropriate arrow. You will also see the suspension drawing move just as it would in the real vehicle.  The suspension in the static position is drawn in light gray for comparison (or dark gray if you have chosen that Option).  The static Instant Centers and Roll Center are also drawn in light gray so you can see how much they have moved due to Dive and Roll. 
To the right of the drawing, you will see Spring Compressn and Dyn Camber also change as you go through various amounts of Dive and Roll.  Both of these numbers are very useful: 
Spring Compressn: Positive spring compression means the spring is compressed from its static (standing still before any Dive or Roll) position, or the car is diving. Negative spring compression means the spring is elongated or the car is rising.  By making spring compression match the motion shown by your shock travel indicators, you ensure you are moving the suspension through somewhat the same motion which your car sees on the track. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator      Chapter 1  Introduction 
Dyn Camber, deg:  Dynamic Camber is the camber the tire will see due to Dive and/or Roll.  Camber has a large impact on the tire patch on the track, and therefore tire traction.  By optimizing camber you can produce higher traction and therefore faster lap times. 
Play around with some of the option buttons or commands in the Menu bar.  You can’t hurt the program. Once you feel a little comfortable with the program, read the rest of this short manual to learn the definitions of all the specs,  how to save a set of suspension specifications, recall information which has been previously saved, or what the various options can do.  Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program. 
Figure 1.8  Analyzing the Suspension Motion with Dive and Roll 


Spring Compressio n shows how spring (and shock) is moving with Dive & Roll. 

Dynamic Camber shows how tire camber changes with Dive & 
Click on arrow buttons to increment Dive and Roll up or down, or just type in your desired Dive and Roll. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Figure 2.1 shows the Roll Center Calculator’s Main Screen with explanations of your options.  
Figure 2.1  Main Menu Options Menu bar.  Click here for “drop down” Suspension Layout diagram to menus of program options. show Roll Center location, Camber Gain, dimensions and 
Name of current vehicle changes with Roll and Dive. 
file This area holds other specs, shows calculated specs and specs that change with Dive and Roll. 

Click on Yes to enable specs to put suspension through Dive and Roll. Click on Draw Big to enlarge suspension  drawing. 
Click on most any spec name or input and a brief 
description of the item is given here 
Enter dimensions for suspension here.  Suspension Layout and 
calculated specs are updated as you enter specs. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
The Roll Center Calculator lets you determine a vehicle's front suspension Roll Center and Camber Gain. For a quick background, Roll Center is an imaginary point about which the chassis tends to roll in cornering maneuvers.  In general, the lower the Roll Center, the more the car rolls in the corners.  The farther right the Roll Center the less the right side moves up or down during cornering.   Camber Gain is the amount of camber change (tilt of the tires when viewed from the front) you get from a certain amount of body motion, typically 1 inch of dive from braking.  Most race cars want Camber Gain in the range of  -1 to -2 degrees for an inch of dive. For circle track cars (always turning left), you may want positive camber gain on the left side.  Both of these have a large impact on a car’s handling and maximum cornering capability.  See Appendix 1. 
Basic procedure for using the program: 
1. 
You enter measurements from your car (or open an example file of measurements provided with the program by clicking on File and then Open). 

2. 
The program draws your suspension on the screen, including calculated dimensions like King Pin Angle, Instant Centers and the Roll Center in the Suspension Layout drawing. 

3. 
Once all measurements are entered, you can force the suspension into various amounts of Dive and Roll by selecting the Yes option in the Show Dive & Roll section.  As the suspension is redrawn with various amounts of Dive and Roll, the new Roll Center, Camber and Spring Compression are displayed. 

4. 
Watching Spring Compression (in the Other Dimensions & Specs section to the right of the layout drawing) is useful for matching the actual vehicle motion you see on the track.  Adjust Dive & Roll so the springs go through the range of motion indicated by your shock travel indicators.  This assumes the shocks and springs have approximately the same motion ratio. 


(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.1 Main Screen Inputs & Outputs 
The Main Screen has 4 major sections, each which will be discussed in this section: 
1. 
Static Layout Dimensions 

2. 
Other Dimensions & Specs 

3. 
Show Dive & Roll 

4. 
Suspension Layout Drawing 


2.1.1 Static Layout Dimensions 
Before we define the inputs in this section, lets take a minute to describe how you will make these measurements. 
Taking Suspension Measurements  
You enter the measurements from your car's front suspension members into the Layout Screen.  First, park the car on a flat, level surface.  First we must decide on what we will call the car’s centerline.  Many people use a distance half way between the left and right tire patches.  The disadvantage of this method is if you change rim widths or wheel offsets your centerline can change.  This means all your measurements are now off also.  There­fore, we usually recommend a distance half way between the frame rails, or the frame mounts on the lower arms.  These locations usually will stay in one place.  Once you’ve decided on the method, use a tape measure to mark a point on the floor which is halfway between the your references.  This will now be your car’s centerline and is 0 in the X (horizontal) direction in the Static Layout Dimensions section. 

Once you decide on a centerline for a particular car, you must make all measurements from this same centerline. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 

In symmetric cars where the left and right side are identical, the centerline can also be the center of the engine and can be marked by dropping a plumb bob (pointed weight on a string) down from the center of the crank pulley.  Then with the plumb bob, place the string on the center of a new suspension point to be measured and drop the bob until it just touches the floor.  Measure the distance from the car's 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
centerline to where the plumb bob points on the floor.  This is the "X" distance for that particular suspension point. 
You can print a blank worksheet for recording your measurements by clicking on File at the upper left of the Main Screen (in the Menu Bar), then clicking on Print Blank Worksheet.  Be sure you have first selected the correct Suspension Type (Double A Arm or MacPherson Strut) by clicking on Suspension Type  in the Menu Bar to obtain the correct worksheet for your car. 
For entering dimensions, 2 other options can be important: 
Enter X & Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Jnts Enter X & Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle 
If it is easier to measure the lengths or the A Arms and the angle of the A Arms, choose the Arm Len & Angle option.  You still have to measure the X and Height of one end of the arm, but not both.   For the Upper Arm, you will enter the Ball Joint X and Height, and the Length and the Angle. For the Lower Arm, you will enter the Frame Mount X and Height, and the Length and the Angle.  Changing this option will Enable and Disable the appropriate dimension specs so you know which values to enter.  This option is not available for MacPherson Strut suspensions. 
Camber Changes with New Inputs Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs 
For entering a new suspension, it may be better to select the “Camber Does Not Change with 
New Inputs” option.  This prevents Camber from continually being changed (possibly to very unusual values) as you enter new measurements.  Once you have a new suspension entered, choosing the “Camber Changes with New Inputs” option works well to see how suspension adjustments or modifications will change camber. 
Enter all the X and Height measurements into the screen.  The screen's drawing and calculated values are updated after each entry. This lets you immediately see if a value you entered looks wrong. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
The Roll Center location and Left and Right Instant Centers are also drawn in as large dots.  Instant Centers are the imaginary points about which  each  side of the suspension tends to rotate and usually appear on the opposite side of the suspension.  For example, Right side’s Instant Center will usually appear on the left side of the Suspension Layout drawing.  The Roll Center is black on most computers, and the Instant Centers match the colors of the Left or Right suspension drawing.  If these locations are off the screen, they are drawn at the correct height with an arrow pointing to their "off screen" location. 
Upper Ball Joint Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the ball joint on the upper arm on either the right side or left side, in inches.  Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See page 15-16 for a definition of possible centerlines. 

Upper Frame Pivot Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the pivot on the frame mount on the upper arm on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See page 15-16 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Lower Ball Joint Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the ball joint on the lower arm on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See page 15-16 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
Lower Frame Pivot Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the pivot on the frame mount on the lower arm on either the right side or left side, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See page 15-16 for a definition of possible centerlines. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Upper Spring Pad Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the upper mounting pad for the spring, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See page 15-16 for a definition of possible centerlines.  (These inputs are not required for Instant Center calculations.) 
Tip:  If you are more interested in shock travel than spring travel, enter the top shock mount location. However, the Wheel Rate calculated from the Spring Rate you enter in the Other Dimensions & Specs section will not be exactly correct. 
Lower Spring Pad Location 
X is the distance from the car centerline to the center of the mounting pad for the spring on lower right arm, in inches. Height is the distance from the ground to this same location.  See page 15-16 for a definition of possible centerlines. (These inputs are not required for Instant Center calculations.) 
Tip:  If you are more interested in shock travel than spring travel, enter the lower shock mount location. However, the Wheel Rate calculated from the Spring Rate you enter in the Other Dimensions & Specs section will not be exactly correct. 
Upper Arm Length 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Length of upper right arm from Pivot Center to Ball Joint center as viewed from the front, in inches.  This can be shorter than actual length measured along the arm if arm is swept forward or back.  See Figure 2.6.  This spec is only enabled if you have chosen the ‘Enter X & Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle’ option. 
Upper Arm Angle 
Angle of the upper left arm as viewed from the front, in degrees.  A positive angle means the arm angles up as the arm goes away from the car centerline, which is typical. 
Lower Arm Length 
Lower Arm Angle 
See Upper Arm Length and Upper Arm Angle explanations above. 
2.1.2 Other Dimensions & Specs 
Spring Length 
Installed or Static length of the spring measured along spring centerline before any Dive or Roll.  You can not enter this value directly.  This length is calculated from the X and Height for the Upper and Lower Spring Pad Locations.  This value is useful to check that your X and Height measurements are entered correctly, as it should closely match your installed spring length. 
Spring Angle 
Installed angle of spring measured between spring centerline and vertical, in degrees. You can not enter this value directly.  This angle is calculated from the X and Height for the Upper and Lower Spring Pad 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Locations.  This value is useful to check that your X and Height measurements are entered correctly, as it should closely match your installed spring angle. 
Spring Deflection 
The change in the length of the spring due to Dive or Roll.  Negative (-) means spring compression from diving, positive (+) means elongation from rising.  Since shocks generally are mounted close to the spring locations, shock travel is very similar to Spring Deflection. 
Spring Rate 
Is the force required to compress the uninstalled spring 1 inch, in pounds.  The spring is assumed to be linear, that is if 500 lbs compresses the spring 1", 1000 lbs will compress the spring 2".  This is an input which you enter and effects the Wheel Rate described below. 
Wheel Rate  
Figure 2.8  Illustration of Camber, King Pin   
The force required to move wheel                    Axis and Scrub Radius   
center 1 inch up while the chassis does  
not move, in pounds.  This is a  

calculated spec (can not be entered directly) and depends on the Spring Rate and suspension geometry. 
Scrub Radius 
The distance from where the king pin axis hits the ground and the center of the tire patch. See Figure 2.8 for King Pin Axis. This is a calculated spec (can not be entered directly). 
Camber 
The degrees of tilt of the wheel with respect to the ground as viewed from 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
the front, in degrees.  Negative camber means the top of the wheel tilts in towards the car, which is typical of most race cars. This is an input which you enter.  See Figure 2.8. 
Dynamic Camber 
The new, Dynamic camber of the wheel caused by Dive and Roll.  See Camber above. 
Hub Distance 
The distance from the center of the lower ball joint to the mounting surface of the wheel hub.  See Figure 2.9. 
Wheel Rim Width 
Width of the wheel rim from inside bead to bead, in inches.  This measurement is usually about 1” less than measuring from outside edge to outside edge. 
Wheel Rim Offset 
The distance from the inside of the wheel rim to the wheel's mounting surface, sometimes called backspacing. This is usually measured by laying the wheel face up on the floor and measuring from the floor to the mounting surface. 
King Pin Angle 
King pin axis is the line intersecting the upper and lower ball joints.  The angle is the angle between this axis and a vertical line.  See Figure 2.8. This is a calculated spec (can not be entered directly). 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.1.3 Show Dive & Roll 
Figure 2.10  Show Dive & Roll Section of Main Screen 

As shown in Figure 2.10, you must first select the Yes option in this section before any of these inputs or command buttons become enabled. 
Dive 
The amount the car's front end drops compared to its static (standing still) height.  To simulate the front end rising, enter a negative (-) number. 
Roll 
The amount the car's front end rolls (leans) due to cornering forces, compared to its static (standing still) angle. A positive (+) angle means the car is leaning to the Right, typical of Left turns. Use a negative (-) number to lean Left (Right turns). 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Draw ‘Big’ 
This command button lets you select a screen mode shown in Figure 2.11 where the Suspension Layout is drawn about twice its normal size.  In this mode you can see things in more detail. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.1.4 Suspension Layout 
The features of the Suspension Layout drawing are discussed in Figure 2.12 below. 
Figure 2.12  Major Features of the Suspension Layout Screen 
Camber Gain and the motion on which it is based is given in this line. 
Right Instant Center drawn in blue just like the right side suspension. The arrow drawn in this Figure (not on the computer screen) shows how it has moved from its static location (gray dot with blue outline). 

Left Instant Center drawn in red just like the left side suspension.  The arrow drawn in this Figure (not on the computer screen) shows how it has moved from its static location (gray dot with red outline).  The red arrow pointing off the screen shows its actual location is off the screen. 
Roll Center drawn in black.  The arrow drawn in this Figure (not on the computer screen) shows how it has moved from its static location (gray dot with black outline). 



Dynamic Roll Center location (due to Dive and Roll)is shown in black. 
Static Roll Center location is shown in black, unless the car is in Dive and/or Roll.  Then it is shown in gray (as shown here) for comparison to the Dynamic Roll Center. 
Letters A-L relate to dimensions listed in Static Layout Dimensions section. See page 15. 
(C)
Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 

(C)
Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 


2.2 Main Screen Options 
In the Menu Bar at the top of the Main Screen, there are 8 main menu commands: 
1.
 File 

2.
 Options 

3.
 Suspension Type 

4.
 Shim 

5. 
Table & Graph 

6.
 Comments 

7.
 Help 


8. About These are discussed in this section. 

File 
Click on File to present several standard Windows File options: 
New blanks out all the current spec inputs, calculated values, comments and changes the current file name to Untitled. 
Open presents a standard Windows File Open dialog box, where you can open a Roll Center file which was previously saved.  You can select different directories or disk drives for files.  You can choose most any file, but if the program senses the file is not a Roll Center file, you will be given notice and the file will not be opened. 
Save saves the current specs to the current file name.  This is 

a shortcut to update the current file with the current specs and measurements. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Save As also presents a standard Windows File Open dialog box, where you save a Roll Center file to a name of your choosing.  Certain names are not acceptable, including: 
• 
Names with more than 3 characters to the right or 8 characters to the left of a period (.) . 

• 
Names over 11 characters long (12 characters if one is a period). 

• 
Names which include the characters: 


/ \ [ ] : | <  >  +  =  ;  ,  * ?   or   spaces You can also select different directories or disk drives for saving files. 
Tip to Advance Users:  The default directory for opening and saving files is RCFILES.  The program will not allow  you to delete files or create different directories.  However though File Manager (Windows 3.1) or Windows Explorer (Windows 95) you can do this.  This will allow you to create a directory (folder) structure for organizing your files. 
Print prints the Main Screen. 
Print Blank Worksheet prints the main screen with blank boxes for all inputs. 
Windows Print Setup opens the standard Windows menu for selecting the printer, page orientation, etc. 
Options 
Click on Options for the list shown in Figure 2.15. 
Enter X & Ht Readings, Frame & Ball Jnts Enter X & Ht at 1 End, Arm Len & Angle 
If it is easier to measure the lengths or the A Arms and the angle of the A Arms, choose the Arm Len & Angle option.  You still have to measure the X and Height of one end of the arm, but not both.   For the Upper Arm, you will enter the Ball Joint X and Height, and the Length and the Angle. For the Lower Arm, you will enter the Frame Mount X and Height, and the Length and the Angle.  Changing this option will Enable and Disable the appropriate dimension specs so you know which values to enter. This ‘Len & Angle’ option is not available for MacPherson Strut suspensions. For more details, see the Example in Section 1.5. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Draw Extension Lines Don’t Draw Extension Lines 
Lets you choose if imaginary extension lines should be drawn in the Suspension Layout.  These extension lines help show how the Instant Centers and Roll Center are arrived at.  Figure 2.11 shows extension lines, Figure 2.17 does not. 
Background Car Layout Color - Light Gray Background Car Layout Color - Light Gray 
Lets you select the color for the background car and suspension drawing in the Layout screen.  The Background Car shows the static position of the suspension and car before any Dive and/or Roll. 
Camber Changes with New Inputs Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs 
For entering a new suspension, it may be better to select the “Camber Does Not Change with New Inputs” option.  This prevents Camber from continually being changed (possibly to very unusual values) as you enter new measurements.  Once you have a new suspension entered, choosing the “Camber 
Changes with New Inputs” option works well to see how suspension adjustments or modifications will change tire camber. 
Camber Gain Definition Specs 
Click on this option and you get the menu of Figure 2.16.  This menu lets you change the amount of body movement the program uses to determine Camber Gain.  
First you select the Type of Calc, which means either to use the program's standard definition of 1" of Dive with No roll, or to Use Specs Below (in this menu). 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
If you select to Use Specs Below, the Body Dive, inches and Body Roll, degrees specs become enabled so you can enter or change them.  If you click on the OK/Exit button while Use Specs Below is selected, the Camber Gain at the Main Screen will now be based on these custom specs.  This definition is always displayed in the Suspension Layout screen as shown in Figure 2.17. 
Click on Cancel to close this menu and return to the original specs used for calculating Camber Gain. 
Suspension Type 
Click on Suspension Type to choose Double A Arm, as pictured in Figures 2.1 or 2.11, or MacPherson Strut type shown in Figure 2.17.   The Shim option for inputting the Length and Angle of the Strut are not available for this suspension type.  Also realize that if you switch Suspension Types with a current set of suspension dimensions, the drawing will look very unusual. 
Figure 2.17  MacPherson Strut Suspension Type 
Camber Gain Definition is always shown here 
Struts replace the arms drawn for the Double A Arm suspension type. 
Strut dimensions replace the Upper Arm dimensions here also. 
The Shim option or inputing the Length and Angle of the Strut are not available for this suspension type. 

(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Shim 
Click on Shim when this option is enabled, and then select from the choices of shimming the left or right arm  You are then presented with the menu shown in Figure 2.18. 
This menu lets you move the Frame Pivot point of the upper A arm in or out, as is usually done by adding or removing shims.  The software keeps the length of the arm constant and calculates where the Ball Joint end will be after the adjustment.  
First, select whether you want to Add or Remove shims from the first Combo box. Then select whether you want to use standard sixteenth (1/16) and eighth (1/8) inch shims, or to enter some other 'Custom' shim adjustment.  After your selection, the lower inputs will become enabled as appropriate.  Selecting 'No Shims' disables the lower inputs. 
An estimate of the new Camber is given at the top for the shim adjustment currently entered, with the Current Camber also given for comparison.  (If you have Not selected the option at the Main Screen that Camber should be adjusted with changing dimensions, you will be asked if you want Camber to be adjusted before it is.) 
The entries and suspension layout on the Main Screen are not updated until you click on 'Use Calc Value'. 

 Important:  This menu assumes that Adding shims moves the Frame Pivot farther out from the car (reducing negative camber or increasing positive camber). Some chassis (for example: the left side on some Lefthander Chassis) work the opposite, adding shims moves the pivot inward.  If your chassis is like this, select 'Remove Shims' if you are actually adding shims or 'Add Shims' if you are actually removing shims. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Table & Graph 
Click on Table & Graph for a more detailed analysis of how Camber changes for several combinations of Dive and Roll.  This option is fairly extensive and is covered in a separate section, Section 2.3 on the next page. 

characters or so), and are saved with a Roll Center file.  Comments are a good way to keep track of what each saved Roll Center file is. 
 Help 
Click on help for information on your options for the Main Screen of this program. 
About 
Click on About for information on the program, Performance Trends, and your registered name and code #. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
2.3 Camber Table & Graph 
If you click on Table & Graph at the Main Screen, you will obtain a screen similar to Figure 2.20.  This screen shows you 2 tables of Camber values for a set on Dive and Roll combinations.  The top table is for the Right side and the bottom is for the Left side. 
Figure 2.20 Typical Camber Table (hiding the baseline data) 

Right side camber table.  Click and drag the mouse to select (highlight) rows you want to graph.  Correspond­ing Left rows are also graphed. This particular table is not showing a baseline condition for comparison. 

Left side camber table.  Note you can not select (highlight) rows here. 
You can also select to have a Baseline condition displayed in the Table (Show Baseline Data).  This is useful to compare 2 different suspension layouts.  A Baseline is some previous condition which was shown in the Table.  You can select to have the Baseline always be updated to whatever condition was previously in the Table (Previous Table is Baseline Data), or to save some specific Baseline condition of interest (Baseline is Saved Data).  See Figure 2.21. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
To save the current Table as a Baseline, click on 'Baseline', then 'Save This Data as Baseline'. The program will ask you for a Comment to describe the Baseline condition.  This Comment will be printed with the Table when you print it if you are Showing the Baseline condition.  This comment can also be edited by clicking on 'Baseline' and then 'Baseline Comment'. 
After saving a baseline Table, you could close the Table by clicking on Back in the Menu Bar, make a change in the suspension and create the table again by clicking on Table & Graph.  You would produce a Camber Table like Figure 2.22. 

Figure 2.22  Camber Table Showing Baseline Condition 

3 rows for each condition: new suspension cam­ber, baseline camber and the difference in degrees. 
User selected 
only rows with Dive = 2 inches. If you now select the Graph command, only 2 inches of Dive for new & baseline, Left and Right will be graphed (4 graphs total) 
Click on Print to print the Table. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 
Click on the Options menu item and select 'Specs for Table Rows & Columns' to change the Dive and Roll increments, and which is used for rows and which is used for columns.  You will obtain the menu shown in Figure 2.23. 
As you change the specs in this menu, the Preview at the bottom changes to show what the Roll and Dive increments, and the general layout of the Camber Table will look like.  The program allows only up to 10 rows and 11 columns.  Your inputs may be changed if a combination produces more than these limits. 
When you are satisfied with the Preview, click on OK/Exit.  Click on Cancel to close this menu and return to the original Table layout. 
Note:  If you change the Camber Table specs, any previously saved baseline conditions will be lost because that baseline has different increments for columns and rows, which would not match up to the new increments you have selected. 

Click on the Graph menu item and you can Graph the selected data from the Table.  To select data, you highlight various rows by clicking and dragging the mouse in the top Table for the Right Side. These selected (highlighted) rows, AND the corresponding rows in the bottom table for the Left side, will be graphed.  If you have selected more data than the Graph can hold, you will be told and the top and bottom rows only of what you’ve selected will be graphed. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998 Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 

This screen graphs of Camber in degrees on the vertical Y axis versus either Roll or Dive on the horizontal X axis.  The data graph here is based on what was highlighted in the Camber table when you clicked on the Graph menu item.  Data is always graphed for the Left side as well as the Right side for whatever conditions you have selected (highlighted). 
Read the labels in the "legend" at the right side of the graph to see which lines are which colors. The graph is always "autoscaled" which means the program picks the scales for drawing it to display all data with good detail. Print the graph on your printer using your Windows default printer by clicking on the "Print" menu command. You can change settings, labels and Windows printer setup by clicking on the "Options" menu command.  See Figure 2.25.  You can return to the Camber Table screen by clicking on the Back menu command. 
(C)Performance Trends Inc 1998  Roll Center Calculator       Chapter 2  Definitions 

The Graph Options screen  is divided into 4 sections.   
The first section is called "Graph Labels":  Click on "Use Standard Labels" for standard labels to be printed on the graph.  Click on "Use Labels Given Here" and the program will use the labels which you can enter or change.  Click on any of the 3 text boxes and type in your chosen titles or labels.  
The second section of the Graph Options is called "Print": Click on "Black and White" or "Color" to tell the program how to print the graph.  Unless you have a color printer, you should choose "Black and White". The program always graphs in color on the computer screen.  Click on the "Print Now" button to print the current plot on the printer, the same as selecting the "Print" menu command.  Click on the "Windows Printer Setup" button to see the current printer selection or select a different printer for printing the graph. 
The third section lets you pick the line thickness for the "Plot Lines", either thick or thin.  
The fourth section lets you pick the color for the "Background Color" of the graph, either black or white. 
Click on OK to return to the Graph Screen with your changes in effect. 
38 
Appendix 1  "Rules of Thumb" for Desired Roll Center, Camber and Camber Gain 
Roll Center is an imaginary point about which the chassis tends to roll in cornering maneuvers.  In general the lower the Roll Center the more the car rolls in the corners, and the farther right the Roll Center the less the right side moves up or down during cornering.   Camber Gain is the amount of camber change (tilt of the tires when viewed from the front) you get from a certain amount of body motion, typically 1 inch of dive from braking.  Most race cars want Camber Gain in the range of  -1 to ­2 degrees for an inch of dive.  This is expecially true for the outside tire in a turn.  For circle track cars (always turning left), the desired camber gain on the left side may be less or even a posifive number, depending on track banking and other factors. Both of these have a large impact on a car’s handling and maximum cornering capability. 
Note from Performance Trends:  It is difficult to get any agreement from “experts” on optimum Roll Center location, Camber Gain, static Camber setting, etc.  This is true for most any suspension setting.  The reason appears to be that these settings are so combination dependent.  Traction capability of the track and tires; tire construction; roughness of track; temperatures; compliance of the chassis, suspension members and bushings, shock settings, etc.  However, the component with the biggest effect on optimum settings is the driver.  Driver preference for how a car handles and “feels” has a huge effect on their confidence, aggressiveness on the track and lap times. 
The  following statements are ones we have found in various references which appear to be consistent between these references. 
Roll Center: 
Several authorities agree that the static Roll Center (before any Dive or Roll) should be from 2.5" to 4.5" above the ground.  For road race cars (turning both left and right) you want to keep the Roll Center near the car's centerline (left or right). 
The farther the Roll Center is to the Left, the quicker the car will react (more it will Roll) when going into a Left turn.  For this reason, many asphalt circle track (left turning) cars locate the Roll Center to the right of center (less Roll) and dirt cars locate the Roll Center to the Left of center (more Roll and hopefully better "bite" at the right front).  However, the car is more predictable "all around" if the Roll Center is kept close to the car's centerline. 
Higher banking (20 degrees or more) usually requires a lower Roll Center, in the 2-3 inch range. 
The more mass in the front of the car (heavier engine or engine more forward), the higher the Roll Center should be. 
Some authorities believe a lower Roll Center works better on dirt because the higher body roll produces more "side bite" from the tires. 
Lower Roll Centers require stiffer springs to control Roll.  However, stiff springs hurt traction on bumpy tracks. 
The less the Roll Center moves during Dive and Roll, the more predictable the car's handling. 
Most authorities agree that holding the Roll Center position as constant as practical during Dive and Roll is optimum. 
Camber/Camber Gain: 
For Circle Track cars (turning left), reasonable Static Camber values (before any Dive or Roll) are:  Left Side + 1 degree, Right Side -2 to -3 degrees. 
Wider and/or stiffer sidewall tires require less Static Camber. 
Camber Gain should be in the range of -1.75 for a flat track, -1.25 for a medium banked track (10-15 degrees) and down to -1 for highly banked tracks (over 25 degrees) on the outside tire (right tire in a left turn). For circle track cars (always turning left), the desired camber gain on the left side may be less or even a posifive number, depending on track banking and other factors. These Camber Gains are based on the program's standard definition as the amount of Camber Change from 1" of Dive. 
Index 
Angle, 9, 10, 14, 17, 20, 22, 28, 30 Arm Len & Angle, 9, 10, 17, 28 Assumptions, 3 
Baseline, 1, 33, 34 
Camber, 5, 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 17, 21, 22, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40 Camber Changes with New Inputs, 17, 29 Camber Gain, 5, 1, 8, 9, 14, 39, 40 Centerline, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 39, 40 Comments, 6 
Directory, 2, 4 Dive, 5, 1, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 39, 40 Double A Arm, 1, 17, 30 Draw Big, 1 Dyn Camber, 11, 12 Dynamic Camber, 12, 22 
Extension Lines, 1, 24, 29 
File, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 17, 27, 28 
Graph, 5, 27, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37 
Help, 3, 4, 6, 7, 27, 32 Hub Distance, 21, 22 
Install, 4 Installation, 5, 4 Instant Center, 2, 18 Instant Centers, 1, 11, 14, 18, 29 
King Pin, 14, 21, 22 
Layout, 5, 14, 15, 18, 24, 25, 29, 30 Length, 9, 17, 19, 20, 28, 30 
Library, 12 Lower Arm Length, 20 Lower Ball Joint, 9, 18 Lower Frame Pivot, 16, 18 Lower Spring Pad, 19, 20, 21 
MacPherson, 17, 28, 30 
Open, 2, 5, 6, 14, 27, 28 
PERFTRNS.PTI, 2, 4 Print, 1, 2, 27, 34 
Registered Owner, 3, 4 Roll, 1, 4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 39, 40 Roll Center, 1, 4, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, 14, 18, 27, 28, 29, 32, 39, 40 
Safety, 4, 3 Save, 6, 28, 34 Scrub Radius, 21 Setup, 4 Shim, 27, 30, 31 Shocks, 11, 14, 19, 21, 39 Spring, 1, 6, 11, 14, 19, 20, 21 Spring Compressn, 11 Suspension Library, 5, 6 
Table, 5, 1, 27, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 Tech Help, first page after cover page, 3, 4 
Upper Arm Angle, 20 Upper Arm Length, 19 Upper Ball Joint, 7, 8, 9, 10, 18 Upper Frame Pivot, 18 Upper Spring Pad, 19 
Wheel Rate, 19, 21 Wheel Rim Offset, 22 Worksheet, 17, 27 Wheel Rim Width, 22 Windows, 1, 2, 4, 5 X&Ht Readings, 7, 9, 10 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix 9 New Features in v2.4 C 
Version 2.4C adds several features, which include: 
New Suspension Types or Options 
Roll Center for Double A Arm and McPhearson Strut suspensions are now calculate using the Force Based Roll Center methodology.  This method is more accurate and realistic.  You will no longer see roll centers being calculated, say, 50 or 1000 inches beyond the track of the car, which made very little sense.  There is a Preference Setting which lets you revert back to the old “Kinematic” method of calculating Roll Center, which was what we did before this new v2.4C.  Figs A 6.50 and  A 6.51. 
De Dion rear suspension is now one of the Rear Suspension Types you can choose from.  The De Dion is somewhat of a hybrid.  It is like a independent rear suspension in that the differential or transaxle is mounted to the chasses, eliminating unsprung weight.  But for suspension geometry, it is like a solid axle (live axle).  There is a beam that solidly connects the wheel spindles on right and left.  Fig A 6.52. 
You can now specify a Jacob’s Ladder as a possible “lateral locator” for solid axle suspensions.  Fig A 6.53. 
Now if you specify either end of the car as having traction (driving tires) and the suspension type is independent, fields open up for you to enter the location of the center’s of the CV or U joints.  The program will calculate the length of the half shafts connecting these 2 joints. Then when you have the suspension go through motion, the program will calculate how much the length changes.  Note:  You can not choose to use Push or Pull Rod suspension types to be able to specify CV joints.  Figs A 
6.54 and A 6.55. 
New History Log Feature 
We have added a “History Log” to the ways of opening a file.  The History remembers the last 100 files you have been working with.  The number of files saved is selectable in the Preferences menu.  This can be a very handy to be able to go back and see what files you have been working with.  Fig A 6.56. 
Click on File, then Open from History Log at the Main Screen to obtain the History Log shown below in Figure 3.37.  This screen shows a summary of the results for the last 100 tests you have worked with (started new, opened, graphed, etc.)  When you work with a new test, it is added to the top of the History Log, and (if the Log is full) the last run drops off the bottom of the list. The History Log is an alternate way to Open tests which have been saved to the Test Library.  The advantage of the History Log is it lists the tests you most recently worked with at the top, making them easier to find.  Fig A 6.56. 
Suspension File and Path Click on Suspension File and Path and you are asked if you want to retrieve the file which produced these results.  Fig A 6.56. 
Graph?  Choose to Graph certain files by clicking on the “Graph ?” column to insert a Yes there.  Click on an existing “Yes” to remove it.  Files marked Yes to Graph will be graphed when you click on the “Graph Tests Marked 'Yes' ”.  The first file (usually the current file you are working with) is always graphed even with no Yes marked.  The number of files actually graphed is limited by available space, usually a limit of about 40 graph lines total.  Figs A 6.56 and A 6.57. 
Std Graph Title  Click on “Std Graph Title” to change the Standard Title for this file.  The program will default to the file name, but you can change it to most anything you want.  (You can also specify 'Alternate' titles and legend names by clicking on 'Format' at the top of the Graph Screen, then “Edit Printed Comments and Data Output”.)  Figs A 6.56 and A 6.57. 
Save?  Choose to Save certain Files to the History Log by clicking on the Save column to insert a Yes there.  Files marked Yes to Save move to the bottom of the History Log as more runs are made, but will not fall off the History Log. NOTE: If a file falls off the History Log, it is not deleted.  You just have to open it via File, then Open, or add to a graph via Add Suspension.  Fig A 6.57. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Front Suspension / Rear Suspension  These columns show the type of suspension for each end of the vehicle. History Log Commands Graph Tests marked ‘Yes’ Click this to close the History Log and graph all files with a Yes in the “Graph ?” column. Graph Current Test Only Click this to close the History Log and graph only the first test in the History Log, which is 
the file you are working with on the main screen. Clear (erase History Log) Click this to erase all files out of the History log except those with a Yes in the “Save?” column or the current file in the top row. 
Print You can print the History Log on a printer by clicking on the 'Print' menu command.  Note that the printed History Log will be most readable when the Page Orientation is in Landscape setting. 
Note that just the Test File Name stays in the History Log.  Should you delete the file using the Open (from all saved tests) command, the test file will be deleted but the name will stay in the History Log.  When you try to open it or graph if from the History Log, you will get note saying the file can not be found. 
New Spring and Shock Calculations 
The program now has screens for entering Shock Dyno data.  Click on Vehicle Specs, then Shock Data for this screen.  If you have Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno software, there is a “Send” feature to automatically send shock dyno data to your computer’s “clip board”.  Then in the Suspension Analyzer’s Shock Dyno screen, click on the “Load from Shock Dyno” command and you can paste the shock dyno data into this screen.  Figs A 6.58 and  A 6.59 and A 6.60. 
The program now displays the spring, bump spring and anti-roll bar forces as the suspension goes through dive, roll, steer and pitch.  In addition, there is a new Shock Velocity input field, where you can enter a shock velocity.  If you have also entered Shock Data, it will also calculate the shock force for this velocity.  NOTE: When the shock is compressing, this is considered a negative velocity (shock getting smaller), and when the shock is extending this is considered a positive velocity.  Other company’s software may consider these velocities differently.  Fig A 6.61. 
If you run a screen animation, the Animate screen now has a Segment Time input.  This time along with the motion for that segment lets the program calculate a shock velocity.  For example, if the Segment is for 2” of Dive and the Segment Time is 1 second, then vehicle’s dive velocity will be 2”/second.  Depending on the shock’s motion ratio, that could be, say, 1.5”/second.  Everything being the same, if you had entered a Time Segment of 0.2 seconds, the velocity would be 7.5”/second.  Fig A 6.62. 
If you have imported Data Logger data to the Suspension Analyzer and do an Animation, the program will calculate the Shock Velocity from the Data Logger data.  It will be displayed in the Shock Velocity field, and below it will be the Shock Force for that velocity, based on the Shock Dyno data you have entered. NOTE: The most accurate Shock Velocity and Force data is calculated when the program has calculated the shock’s position both previous and after the current position.  Therefore, until the program has gone through a complete lap of your Data Logger data, the shock data is a less accurate estimate based on the current shock position and the previous shock position (not the next shock position).  Data Logger Version Only.  Figs A 6.62 and A 6.63. 
The program will also change the Handling Rating based on the Shock Force resulting from the Shock Velocity data entered. 
Because the Shock Absorber features are involved and can produce unexpected results if you are not aware of what you are doing, there is a Preference setting to turn them On and Off.  The default is the Shock Absorber inputs are turned Off.  Turn them On in Preferences.  Figs A 6.51 and  A 6.58. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
New Ball Joint Bind Feature (Data Logger Version Only) 
The advanced Data Logger version of the program now lets you enter the Ball Joint Angle.  This is the angle between ball joint stud position and position of ball joint stud when perfectly centered, perfectly vertical with respect to the ball joint.  The program will then calculate the angle change of the ball joint stud as the suspension goes through motion.  You can also enter a Max Ball Joint Angle. If the program calculates that the Ball Joint Angle exceeds the Max Ball Joint Angle, it will report this condition as Ball Joint Bind. It will also calculate Ball Joint Bind which is the amount the Ball Joint Angle has exceeded the Max Ball Joint Angle.  Fig A 6.68 and A 6.71. 
There is a Calculation screen utility to help you determine the Ball Joint Angle at ride height.  The program knows the Spindle Angle from the ball joint locations.  It asks you to enter the Ball Joint Flange Angle, which is the angle of the ball joint body with respect to horizontal.  This can be found by placing an inclinometer (angle finder) on any flat part of the ball joint.  Fig A 
6.68 and A 6.69. 
You can Graph or Report either Ball Joint Angle or Ball Joint Bind Angle.  Ball Joint Bind Angle will be zero until the Ball Joint Angle exceeds Max Ball Joint Angle. Then this angle will be the angle amount Ball Joint Angle has exceeded Max Ball Joint Angle.  If Max Ball Joint Angle is 25 degrees and Ball Joint Angle is 28 degrees, Ball Joint Bind Angle will be 3 degrees.  Fig A 6.70 and A 6.71. 
Other New Program Features 
Under the “View” list of options, a new choice of Watch Rows has been added.  Here you can specify from 0 to 6 rows of calculated data for you to “watch”.  These rows are listed directly below the suspension drawing so they will always appear in the same place.  This way you do not have to scroll through results for the data you are interested in.  You can choose to have different rows “watched” on the front and rear suspension screens.  Fig A 6.64. 
We have added more options and accuracy to the Anti-Roll Bar Rate Calculator utility.  Figs A 6.65 and  A 6.66. These include: 
• 
Taking the flex of the bars connected to the suspension members on the end of the Anti-Roll Bars into account.  This detail can significantly soften up the bar’s overall spring rate. 

• 
Adding a feature to estimate a “blade” or “sword” anti-roll bar.  This type of bar has a connector link that is very thin.  The flex on this connector link will significantly soften up the bar.  However, this connector link can be turned so it becomes less flexible, significantly raising the bar’s overall spring rate. 


When opening files, there is a new option for “List by Access Date”, in addition to the original “List by File Name” which lists the files alphabetically. List by Access Date is a chronological list, where the files you most recently worked with are listed at the top, with the date you last opened them.  Figs A 6.67. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.50 New Force Based Roll Centers 
Force Base Roll Centers typically do not move around as much with Dive and Roll 
F.B.
 indicates “Force Based” Roll Center Calculations 

K.
 indicates Kinematic 


Kinematic Roll Center moves left as suspension goes through -3 degrees of roll. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.51 New Preferences: Force Based Roll Centers and Shock Data Analysis 
Pick method here 
If you pick Force Based, you must specify how much traction is coming from the outside tire in a turn. 70% is a good assumption for most situations. 
New Preference to all Shock Data to be entered and analyzed. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A 6.53 Jacob’s Ladder 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.54 Independent Suspension Half Shaft Motion 
Independent suspension type 
Your choice here determines if the traction is coming from the front or rear suspension (front or rear wheel drive). If you pick something other than 0% or 100%, the program assumes all wheel drive, that there are half shafts on both suspensions, if they are independent. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.55 Independent Suspension Half Shaft Motion, cont 
Half shafts 
CV Joint Locations 
Half shaft motion 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A 6.57 History Log Features for Graph Screen 
This is the Std Graph Title, as shown in Fig A 6.56. 
If there are more lines in the legend (labels) than can appear on the screen, buttons will appear here to let you scroll them up or down so you can see them all. 
A button can also appear here if the labels have extended off the top of the graph. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.58 Copying Shock Data from Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno Software  
If you have an appropriate Shock Dyno Plus version, you can click on the ‘Send’ option and be presented with the 4 corners of the car. For each corner you can select which shock or coil over’s data to send, or choose “None” for that particular corner. You may have to open other Shock Dyno files, do the Send and select different corners of the car for sending shock data for different shocks. 
As shown in the picture, the Export Data will copy this data to the computer’s clipboard.  This is the same process as doing a Windows Ctrl-C or a Copy process. Therefore, do not do a copy or paste command before you go to your Suspension Analyzer program to import this data. 
You must turn on this Preference before you can do any Shock Data Analysis in the Suspension Analyzer 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A 6.60 Importing Shock Data from Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno Software  
Click here 
and this new 
frame will 
appear with 
the shock 
data loaded 
from the 
clipboard 
displayed. 
Click the Import button to import the proper data to the proper Shock Absorber positions, Right Front, Left Front, etc. This will be as you directed in the Shock Dyno software. 
Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 



Figure A 6.62 Spring and Shock Force Data, Simple Animation 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.63 Spring and Shock Force Data, Animation from Data Logger File 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.64 Watch Rows to Watch Data of Particular Interest 
Choose Watch Rows 
Watch Rows section 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.65 More Detailed and Accurate Anti-Roll Bar Calculation Utility 
Several new choices which account for flex in the arms, and the new “blade” option which has adjustable flex. 
Drawing helps explain inputs. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2020 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 






Figure A 6.71 Ball Joint Angle Movement Graph 
Second graph was done by selecting this “Bind” option. 
Graphing the Angle. 
Graphing Bind. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Appendix X New Features in v2.4 B 
Version 2.4B adds several features, which we have grouped into these categories: 
New Suspension Types or Options 
The program now allows for solid front axles and for several ways of locating them.  Also included are calculations showing the drive shaft angle or U joint angle changes with suspension movement.  Fig 6.33. 
The program has 2 new steering options: 
1. 
One is where the steering is a steering box, there is no center link.  Instead the tie rod on the spindle from one side is tied directly to the steering box arm.  Then the tie rod from the other spindle is effectively tied to spindle that the steering link is attached to.  This is the steering of some Jeep solid axle front suspensions.  Fig 6.34. 

2. 
The second is where the steering is a steering box, but the tie rods do not attach to the center link.  Instead they attach to arms on the steering box and idler arm on arms on opposite side of the center link arms.  This is the steering of some Alfa Romeo suspensions.  Fig 6.35. 


You can now use a panhard bar or a watts link with leaf springs as the Lateral Locator.  Fig 6.36. 
The program has new inputs in Vehicle Specs for: 
1. 
Front, rear or all wheel drive, and what percent of the power is being delivered through the front drive tires.  Fig 6.37. 

2. 
The program has a new input in Vehicle Specs for inputs or inboard or outboard brakes at either the front or rear suspension.  Fig 6.37. 

3. 
Unsprung weight is now an input for front and rear and is used to determine natural frequencies and some handling characteristics.  Prior to this, the program assumed a certain percent of the vehicle’s weight was unsprung.  Fig 6.37. 


There is a Calculation Utility “Clc” screen for entering in inputs for the King Pins for solid axle front suspensions.  Fig 6.38. 
The program now allows you to specify what the opposite end of the car is doing.  This lets you apply "pitch" to the car to see what happens to the calculations.  Fig 6.39.   
You can now enter specs for bump springs for the front and/or the rear suspension.  (This feature is not available for push or pull rod type suspensions.) There is also a Clc screen to calculate these specs, which can be handy if you are working with “stacked” springs.  Fig 6.40. 
The program now calculates and displays new outputs, like Bump Spring Force and Dynamic (after dive and roll are applied) Roll Stiffness, Roll Couple, Front and Rear Lateral Load Transfer, and Natural Frequencies.  This is very handy to watch what happens once the Bump Springs are encountered with suspension movement.  Fig 6.40. 
There are new inputs for Ride Height.  You can then watch Ride Height change when you apply Bump and Roll and the new Pitch input to the suspension.  When you do a top view of the suspension, the location where the Ride Height measurements are made are drawn as small boxes.  These measurement locations are located in the Vehicle Specs screen, as they always have been. Fig 6.41. 
New Graph, Report or Print Features 
If you have swapped graph axes, like camber on the horizontal axes and movement on the vertical axes, and use the cursor, it is horizontal.  Fig 6.46. 
You can now include a picture file with the suspension which will be drawn on the main screen if there is room, and included in printouts of reports or graphs as you direct.  Fig 6.47 and 6.49. 
The program has new print options for graphs and reports of including the suspension picture file (if any).  Fig 6.48. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
You can now include the data table with a graph.  Fig 6.49. 
The printed Graph comments have new options and are described under File, then Printed Comments in the Graph Screen.  Fig 6.49. You can now graph the Jacking Component, Bump Spring Force, and Ride Height.  Fig 6.47.   The Data Type you have picked to graph is now displayed under the list.  Since the list is long and only the first picked data type 
is graphed, many times a type could be picked that you did not see in the list.  Fig 6.47. 
Other New Program Features 
The program now reads some types of Bill Mitchell’s WinGeo (.gem) files, like double a arm and MacPhearson strut.  Fig 6.43. There have been several updates to Emailing Preferences to work better with modern changes to emailing protocols.  Fig 6.44. File Comments are now shown on the main screen if there is enough room.  Fig 6.33. Zoom options for the drawing on the main screen are now included under the "View" menu button options. The program now draws the CG in side view.  Fig 6.39. 'The program now remembers some inputs you have entered in the "Clc" calculation utility screens, like for spring rate, roll 
'bar rate, and the new Unsprung Weight, and more.  These are saved with the file, so in the future you will know where, say, the 
roll bar rate came from. Fig 6.45. The program now remembers the size and position of the main screen when you restart the program.  This way, when you reopen the program, it should revert right back to the same position or size you last arranged. 
The “Advanced” button for Save As now uses current folder as the default folder.   The program now better draws extension lines when the lines extend WAY OFF the drawing screen so as to look more realistic. The program now marks invalid solid front suspensions as "na" in the Vehicle Specs screen. The Company Logo graphic now appears on the main screen.  Fig 6.33. The program now has substituted “Bump Springs” for "Symmetric Chassis" in the Vehicle Specs screen.  This Symmetric 
Chassis feature was never activated in earlier versions. Program now more reliably saves and reads its configuration info so the config file is less likely to get corrupted. If the Registered Name or Registered Code becomes corrupted, the program now allows an easy fix by contacting Performance 
Trends. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.33 New Solid Axle Front Suspension Options 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.34 New Steering System Option, “Steering Box, rod attaches to right spindle” 
2 new steering options, this one common on Jeeps 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.35 New Steering System Option, “Steering Box: Rods attach to rotating arms” 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure A 6.36 Leaf Springs now allow for Lateral Locators, Panhard Bar or Watts Link 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 





Figure 6.41 New Inputs of Ride Height 
In Vehicle specs, the location where Ride Height is measured can be entered here. 
In “Top View”, the location where Ride Height is measured (as entered in the screen shown above) is shown by a light red and light blue box. 
You will enter the Static Ride Height (typically the clearance between the ground and the vehicle’s frame) in the first column. Then the new Dynamic Ride Height (clearance) is displayed in the second column, with the difference in the third. In this case, the Left side Ride Height changed from 4 to 3.63 with 1” of dive and 2 deg of roll, a change of -.37 inches. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices Figure A 6.46 Horizontal Cursors 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 





Figure 6.48 New Options for Printing Graphs and Reports 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Figure 6.49 New Options on a Graph Printout 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2000 Suspension Analyzer Appendices 
Suspension Analyzer V2.4 C for Windows 
User’s Manual 
Performance Trends, Inc. 
Box 530164 Livonia, MI 48152 248-473-9230 Fax 248-442-7750 Website: www.performancetrends.com Email: feedback@performancetrends.com 
Performance Trends, Inc.  PO Box 530164, Livonia, MI 48152 Tech Assistance for Registered Owners (248) 473-9230 Fax: 248-442-7750 Email:  tech@performancetrends.com 
Website (tips, correspond with other users, download demos, update schedule, etc.)  www.performancetrends.com 
Copyright Notice Copyright (C) 2017 PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC.    All Rights Reserved These software programs and user's manual are reserved by PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. and are intended for the use 
of the original owner only.  Copying or duplicating these products except for the personal use of the original owner is a violation of U. S. Copyright Law and is hereby expressly forbidden. Portions Copyright (C) Microsoft Corp.  1987-2011 All Rights Reserved 
Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. 
DISCLAIMER Of WARRANTIES: 
THE SOFTWARE PROVIDED HEREUNDER IS LICENSED "AS IS" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY WARRANTIES FOR MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO ORAL OR WRITTEN STATEMENTS, REPRESENTATIONS OR OTHER AFFIRMATION Of FACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO STATEMENTS REGARDING CAPABILITY, CAPACITY, SUITABILITY FOR USE OR PERFORMANCE Of SOFTWARE SHALL BE RELIED UPON BY USER OR BE DEEMED TO BE A WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION BY PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. FOR ANY PURPOSE, OR GIVE RISE TO ANY LIABILITY Of OBLIGATION Of PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. WHATSOEVER.  USER ACCEPTS ALL RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTING THE SOFTWARE TO MEET USER NEEDS OR SPECIFIC PURPOSES. PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC. IS UNDER NO OBLIGATION TO FURNISH USER UPDATES OR ENHANCEMENTS EVEN IF FURNISHED TO OTHER USERS. 
LIMITATION Of LIABILITY: 
If at the time of delivery to the original User only there are any defects in the media on which the Software is provided, User's sole and exclusive remedy shall be the replacement of any media returned to Performance Trends, Inc. within 90 days of the receipt of the Software by User, or at Performance Trends Inc.'s sole option, a refund of the License fees paid to Performance Trends, Inc. by User. 
IN NO EVENT SHALL PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. OR THIRD PARTIES WHO HAVE RIGHTS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO USER FOR LOSS Of PROFITS, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES EVEN IF PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. IS AWARE Of THE POSSIBILITY Of SUCH DAMAGES. 
Continued on next page. 
IN THE EVENT ANY REMEDY HEREUNDER FAILS Of ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, OR IN ANY OTHER EVENT, PERFORMANCE TRENDS INC.'S LIABILITY HEREUNDER SHALL NOT EXCEED ANY AMOUNTS PAID BY USER TO PERFORMANCE TRENDS, INC. UNDER THIS AGREEMENT. 
Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages and some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above limitations or exclusions may not apply to you. 
No action, regardless of form, arising out of any claimed breach of this agreement or performance under this agreement may be brought by either party more than one year after the affected party learns of the cause of action. 
Refer to diskette envelope for full license agreement. 
******************************************* W A R N I N G  ****************************************** 
The Suspension Analyzer makes calculations based on equations and data found in various published and heretofore reliable documents.  The program is designed for use by skilled professionals experienced with vehicles and Suspensions.  The following processes are hazardous, particularly if done by an unskilled or inexperienced user: 
-Obtaining data to input to the program
 -Interpreting the program's results Before making measurements of or modifications to any Suspension, engine or driving situation, DO NOT FAIL TO:
 -Regard the safety consequences 
-Consult with a skilled and cautious professional 
-Read the entire user's manual 
-Obey all federal, state & local laws 
-Respect the rights and safety of others 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Overview of Features 1 
1.2 Before You Start 2 
1.3 A Word of Caution 3 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 4 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 6 
Chapter 2 Definitions 11 
2.0 Basic Program Operation 11 
2.1 Main Screen Inputs and Outputs 15 2.1.1 Tabs 15 
2.1.2 Dynamic Motion Specs 16 
2.1.3 Suspension Layout 16 
2.1.4 Suspension Data Grid 18 
2.1.5 Main Screen Commands 28 2.2 Preferences 33 

2.3 Other Specs 37 
2.4 Edit Options 41 
2.5 Adjust Options 43 
2.6 Optimize Options 47 2.7 Animate 49 
2.8 Calculation Menus 51 
2.9 New Suspension Menu 59 
Chapter 3 Output 61 
3.1 Reports 63 3.2 ASCII Data Files 67 3.3 Graphs 69 3.4 Printer Output 79 3.5 Suspension Library 81 
Table of Contents, cont 
Chapter 4 Examples 87 Example 4.1 Measuring a Typical Steering Box    (Pitman Arm) Suspension 89 Example 4.2 Analyzing a Suspension 99 Example 4.3 Adjusting and Optimizing Suspension 107 
Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 113 Appendix 2: "Rules of Thumb" for Tuning 
   Suspension Characteristics and 
   Additional Reading 115 Appendix 3: Backing Up Data 121 Appendix 4: Full Vehicle Version Features 125 Appendix 5: Illustrations of Calculations 131 Appendix 6: New Features in v2.0 133 Appendix 7: New Features in v2.4 147 Appendix 8: New Features in v2.4 B 167 Appendix 9: New Features in v2.4 C 183 Index 209 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Overview of Features 
The Suspension Analyzer by Performance Trends, Inc. is software to let circle track racers, road racers, chassis builders, engineers, and performance enthusiasts understand, tune and even design front suspensions.  It does a complete double A-Arm (wishbone) suspension analysis, including bump steer, Ackerman, caster gain, anti-dive, tire scrub, camber gain and much more. Its detailed inputs and calculations will examine all aspects of suspension motion and function in 3 dimensions, left/right, up/down, and forward/back.  Its many features include: 
Features: 
• 
User friendly, Windows interface, compatible with Windows 95, 98, NT and 2000. 

• 
Can print results using most any Windows compatible printer, many times in color. 

• 
The Shim menu where you can shim the upper A-Arms up/down/in/out and see the effect on Camber & Caster.   

• 
The Optimize menu lets the program find optimum settings automatically. 

• 
The Ride Height menu lets you change ride height either by Jacking on the Spring, Changing Tire Size, or Changing Spindle Drop. 

• 
Detailed determination of Wheel Rate and Roll Stiffness. 

• 
View car from front perspective or rear (driver’s) perspective. 

• 
View suspension from front (or rear), top and side. 

• 
Simulate Rack and Pinion or Pitman Arm/Idler Arm/Center link steering systems. 

• 
Draw Extension Lines to see how Instant Centers and Roll Centers are derived. 

• 
Automatically calculate and display Camber Gain, Caster Gain, Toe Gain (bump steer) as measurements and locations are changed and updated. 

• 
Save nearly unlimited number of suspensions for recall, comparison and analysis in the future. 

• 
Allows several reporting and graphing options for analysis for various amounts of Dive, Roll and Steer. 

• 
Write ASCII files for importing data into other computer programs. 


Please read Sections 1.2 "Before You Start" and 1.3 "A Word of Caution" before you turn on the computer.  Then try running the program following the guidelines in 1.4 "Getting Started" and 1.5 "Example to Get You Going".  When you feel a little familiar with the program, take time to read this entire manual.  It will show you all the things you can do with this powerful tool. 
Be sure to check Appendix 6, Appendix 7, Appendix 8, and Appendix 9 for new features introduced in v2.0, v2.4 A, v2.4 B, and 2.4 C, since the original writing of this manual. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.2 Before You Start 
What you will need:   
• Computer with Windows 98, NT, 2000, XP, Vista or Windows 7, Windows 8 or Windows 10 
Many terms used by the Suspension Analyzer and this user's manual are similar to terms used by other publications, i.e. Camber Gain, Bump Steer, etc.  However, these terms may have different definitions.  Therefore, read Chapter 2 to see what these terms mean to the Suspension Analyzer. 
Occasionally it will be necessary to identify "typos" in the manual, known "bugs" and their "fixes", etc. which were not known at the time of first publication.  These will be identified in a file called README.DOC in the Suspension Analyzer directory or folder. This file can be displayed right in the Suspension Analyzer by clicking on Help at the Main Screen, then clicking on Display Readme.doc File.  You can also read it using utilities like NotePad or WordPad. 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Suspension Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures the legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  All features work in Demo mode. Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”. 
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your disk serial number (stamped in blue on the disk), your registered name and code number, and computer hardware number.  The registered name and code numbers are available by clicking on file in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as shown in Figure 1.1. 
Performance Trends will provide you an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking code number and click on OK.  If you typed in the number correctly, you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 1.1, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers.   

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.3 A Word of Caution 
The Suspension Analyzer is a comprehensive software package which estimates a suspension's motion based on limited user input.  These estimates can be used for suspension analysis and tuning.  However, a suspension is a very complex system, which makes exact calculations of all details impossible.  Therefore, several simplifying assumptions are made to reduce the calculations to a manageable level. The user must recognize: 
The software can not predict the safety of a suspension modification or driving situation.  Done correctly, with the proper quality parts and safety precautions, extreme racing conditions can be safe.  Done by inexperienced racers with standard or low quality parts, a race car can be a "disaster waiting to happen".  Please read and follow any "Safety Notes" as highlighted in this manual. 
The software, like any computer model, can NOT make exact predictions because: 
• 
Much of the input data to the software is estimated. 

• 
Even if the input data were exactly correct, the simplifying assumptions within the program will limit the accuracy.  These assumptions include that there is no flex in the suspension arms or bushings. 

• 
Tire characteristics, driver performance, track conditions, etc. are rarely constant and repeatable. 

The software should be used as a guide to: 

• 
Help you understand how a suspension works; what parameters are important, how parameters interact, what are the tradeoffs, etc. 

• 
Point you in the correct, general direction for making modifications. This direction should be verified by other sources like known authorities, race results, books, etc. Never trust one "single source" if it does not make sense to you. 

• 
Make you think, not think for you.  If unexpected results are obtained, take a minute to: 

• 
Double check all your data input. 

• 
Refer back to this manual. 

• 
Ask someone else skilled and experienced in the particular area. 

• 
Give the retailer or Performance Trends Inc's. Tech Help Line a call for an explanation.  (Computer programs are written by normal people who can make mistakes.  It's always possible there may be an error in the calculations.  Your phone call may help us correct it.) 




Please also read the Warranty and Warning at the beginning of this manual and on the diskette envelope.  Also see Appendix 1 for general tips on “optimum” suspension settings and how there is little agreement on what is actually “optimum”. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.4 Getting Started (Installation) 
You must install the Suspension Analyzer from the distribution CD to a hard drive before it will run.  To do this, simply install the CD in your CD Rom drive and the Performance Trends Installation Wizard should automatically start, allowing you to install the Suspension Analyzer and demos of any of our other products. 
If the CD does not auto-run, then click on Start, then Run, then Browse and find your CD drive.  Then look for SETUP.EXE on the CD and run it to run the Installation Wizard.  If you want to bypass the wizard, go into the Programs folder and run the Suspension-Analyzer-v2.4-Installer.exe file. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Entering Registered Owner's Name: 
The first time you run the Suspension Analyzer, you will be asked to enter your name as the Registered Owner.  During this first session, you can modify it until you are satisfied.  Once you accept the name, the computer will generate a Registered Code # based on the name.  To be eligible for Tech Help, you will need both your registered name and code #, and to have sent in your registration card.  The name you enter should be very similar to the name you enter on the registration card. 
Click on Help, then About Suspension Analyzer at the Main Screen to review your name and code # . 
Unlocking Program Options: 
The Suspension Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures that legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Basic version, or the full Vehicle version for ten days.  All features are working in demo mode. 
Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”.  This Unlocking Code will be for either the Basic version or the Full Vehicle Version, whichever you have purchased.   
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your registered code number and computer hardware number.  These are available by clicking on file in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as shown in Figure 1.2. 

Performance trends will provide you with an unlocking code number.  Type in the unlocking code number and click on OK.  If you typed in a number correctly you will be given a message that the program is permanently unlocked to either the Basic or Pro mode.  The program will only run on this one computer. 
If you want to run the program on another computer, you must install it, obtain the computer hardware number and registered code number as shown in Figure 1.2, and call Performance Trends for a new Unlocking Code for that computer.  There may be a charge for additional computers. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.5 Example to Get You Going 
To start the Suspension Analyzer, click on Start, then Programs, then Performance Trends, and then Suspension Analyzer (or click on the Suspension Analyzer icon on your desktop).  During startup of the program, you will be given some introductory tips.  It will also ask if you want to load the last suspension you (or the program) was working with.  To get familiar with the program, answer Yes.  Then an example 
suspension file will be loaded.  
After these brief introduction screens and questions, you will be left at the Main Screen shown in Figure 1.3.  Notice that there is already a suspension file loaded and displayed (if you 
answered Yes to the question of Figure 

Figure 1.3 Main Screen 

new input . The suspension layout above and all calculated specs are immediately updated for this change. Rows with “Input (clc)” are ones where if you click on “Input (clc)” you will be presented with a “calculation” menu where you can calculate the input from other specs.  See Figure 1.9 for an example. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.2). This is for the last suspension file the program was working with when the program was last shut down.  If you just got your program, this would be an example suspension which was loaded at the factory.  The name of the suspension is shown at the top in square brackets [ ] , LIMITED LATE MODEL shown in Figure 1.3. 
A suspension file is made up of basically 2 parts: 
1. 
Suspension Data (measurements) as listed on the Suspension Data grid on the Main Screen. 

2. 
Other Specs which describe the type of suspension and what Suspension Data measurements are needed. 


From this Main Screen, you can:                                            
• 
Enter or edit any “Input” type measurement by clicking on it in the Suspension Data grid.  All calculated Static results are immediately updated to show you the results. 

• 
Edit or review settings or comments for the file you are currently working with by clicking on Other Specs. 

• 
Click on “Dynamic” so you can apply different motions to the suspension for Dive, Roll and/or Steer.  All calculated Dynamic results are immediately updated to show you the results. 

• 
Choose different tabs to view the suspension drawing from Front, Top or Side 

• 
Open or save a file of suspension results and specs by clicking on File in the upper left corner, and then the Open or Save commands. 

• 
Graph or report the suspension for the file you are currently working with.   

• 
Change the Preferences options to somewhat customize the program for your needs. 

• 
Click on File, then Unlock Program Options to obtain codes to give to Performance Trends to permanently unlock the program (take out of the 10 day demo mode).  See Section 1.2, page 2. 

• 
Get HELP to explain these options by clicking on Help. 

• 
Quit the program by clicking on File, then Exit. 


All these options are explained in detail in Chapters 2 and 3. 
To check out how the program works, try applying dynamics to the suspension by clicking on “Dynamics” at the top of the 
Figure 1.4 Main Screen with Vehicle Dynamics 

Click on Dynamic to enable Dive, Roll and Steer. Then type in or click on arrow buttons to apply various amounts of motion. 
Suspension is redrawn with motion applied so you can visualize new positions. 
The Suspension Data table shows the static position (before motion) and the new dynamic position and the change. 
Click and slide scroll bar to data on table you are interested in. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 

Main Screen. See Figure 1.4. Then type in various amounts of Dive, Roll and/or Steer.  Or you can click on the up and down arrow buttons to increment the motions.  You will see the suspension move as in an animation and all dynamic calculations are updated.  You can watch camber, toe in, caster, etc. change immediately. 
Several features are available at the top of the Main Screen in the Menu Bar.  Click on the Graph menu command to open up the graph options menu shown in Figure 1.5.  The graph settings shown in Figure 1.5 are for Left and Right Toe In, deg versus Dive, which would be a typical Bump Steer graph. 
Click on the Make Graph button to produce the graph shown in Figure 
1.6. At the graph screen you have several other options available for changing the graph.  These options are available by clicking on the commands in the menu bar or on the buttons at the top of the screen, including the Help command.  The Help command at this screen (and most screens) provide a good 
background on what the various options are.  For now, just click on Back at the upper left to return to the Main Screen. 
Figure 1.6 Graph from Options Selected in Figure 1.6
Many of the input measurements 
Menu Bar commands
you see on the Main Screen (Figure 1.4) may not be familiar to you.  For a brief definition of the inputs, simply click on the specification name in the first column.  A definition will appear in the with a page # in this manual for more info. 
Some specs have a Type of “Input (clc)”. One example is Spring Rate. The “clc” stands for "calculate". For example, if you want to calculate the spring rate from wire diameter, number of coils, etc., simply click on the “Input (clc)” name in the Type column.  The program will display a new menu listing the inputs and the Calc Spring Rage 

Click on 
Help for an 
overview of 
your options 
for this 
screen. 
Click on Back to return to the Main Screen 
Graphs showing Toe In changing with Dive, or Bump Steer (right side has much more than left). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
from these inputs.  For further explanation, click on the Help buttons in these menus. To use the Calc Spring Rate calculated from these inputs, click on the Use Calc Value button.  Otherwise click on Cancel to return to the Main  menu with no change to Spring Rate.  Section 2.8, Calculation Menus explains all these calculations. 
Figure 1.7 Help at Main Screen 

Click on Other Specs for more Suspension Specs, see Figure 1.8. 
Click on Help at the top of this (and most all) screens for general info and tips on how to use the program 
Click on the name (left column) for any row and a definition and page # is given. 
Figure 1.8 Help and Calc Buttons in Other Specs Menu 
General Help is available by clicking here. 
Click on Calc buttons for Calculation Menus to calculate an input from other details. See Figure 1.9. 
Enter most any comments or notes about the suspension here. These are handy reminders of what this suspension was and what you were doing. 
Click on most any spec or spec name, and a brief Help description is given here in the Help Frame, with a page # in this manual for additional info. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 1 Introduction 
Once you feel comfortable changing specifications in the various menus and making various graphs and reports, read Section 3.5 of this manual called Suspension Libraries to learn how to save suspensions or recall suspensions which have been previously saved.  Then you will know all the basic commands to operate the program.  For a more in-depth knowledge of using these commands and an explanation of the results, read this entire manual. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.0 Basic Program Operation: 
Whenever you start the Suspension Analyzer, you are brought to a Main Screen which will look like Figure 2.1. 
Figure 2.1 Main Screen Name of Current Suspension File
Menu Commands of File, Graph, etc. 
Click on these 
tabs to switch program and change data. 
between different views of the suspension. 
These “Dynamic” commands apply different motions to the suspension 
The Suspension Layout drawing updates as you change inputs (measurements) or apply motion. 

Click on Slide Bar to display more Suspen­sion Data, which may not be able to fit on the screen. 
give you all the options to operate the Click on the Suspension Data grid in an “input” row to type in a new number, then press <Enter>. You can use the arrow keys or <Enter> button to move to the next cell (box) you want to change. 
Many inputs like these shown are locations of points, which require 3 numbers: an “Out” measurement (from the center of the car), a “Height” measurement (above ground), and a “Depth” measurement (distance back from the axle, axle being a line connecting the left and right wheel centers). 
Type of Data, Inputs are numbers you enter, Output is calculated by program Name of Suspension Data in this row. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
If you want to Open a previously saved suspension file, you can click on File in the upper left corner, then click on Open (from all saved suspensions).  You will get a screen as shown in Figure 2.2 where you are presented with a list of saved suspensions in the Suspension Library. Some suspensions are examples provided by Performance Trends.  As you enter suspensions yourself and save the results, you will add many more suspensions to the library.  These saved files are useful for making 

comparisons in the future. 
Figure 2.2 shows that the Suspension Library is divided into sections (called Folders in Figure 2.2)  to help organize a large number of suspensions.  For example, all suspensions for the ABC Team could be saved under a section name of ABC Team.  All Port City (tm) suspensions could be saved under a section (folder) name of Port City.  This will save considerable time and confusion when trying to located a particular suspension in the future.  See Section 3.5 for creating new Folder names. 
To look in different sections, click on the Folder name from the list shown at the lower right of Figure 2.2.  The list of suspensions will then be updated for that Folder. To pick a suspension, simply click on it from the list of suspensions, then click on the Open button. (For those familiar with computers, Folders are actually subdirectories or folders in the 3D-Data folder. The Name “Folder” can be changed to something else, like “Customer”  or “Manufacturer” in the Preferences menu.) 
Notice in Figure 2.1 that a current suspension name is listed at the top in square brackets [ ]. This is the file of recorded suspension measurements, Other Specs, comments etc. which are currently saved in the Suspension Library, and are the suspension measurements and specs you are currently working with.  If you change the measurements, comments, etc, or make a graph or report, it is for this current suspension file.   
If you click on one of the Menu Commands at the top of the Main Screen, you can be presented with a screen of specs. Figure 
2.3 shows the screen for the Other Specs.  Figure 2.3 discusses some of the commands to enter or change settings at this menu and most other menus in the program. 
General Program Operation 
The Suspension Analyzer lets you determine a several aspects of the suspension’s motion and handling characteristics.  These characteristics include Roll Center and Camber Gain. For a quick background, Roll Center is an imaginary point about which the chassis tends to roll in cornering maneuvers.  In general, the lower the Roll Center, the more the car rolls in the corners.  The farther right the Roll Center, the less the right side moves up or down during cornering.  Camber Gain is the amount of camber change (tilt of the tires when viewed from the front) you get from a certain amount of body motion, typically 1 inch of dive from braking. Most race cars want Camber Gain in the range of  -1 to -2 degrees for an inch of dive. For circle track cars (always turning left), you may want positive camber gain on the left side.  Both of these have a large impact on a car’s handling and maximum cornering capability.  See Appendix 1. 
The Basic procedure for using the program involves: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
1. 
You enter measurements from your car (or open an example file of measurements provided with the program by clicking on File and then Open). If you are entering measurements from your car and are starting fresh, it is important you correctly enter the “Other Specs” of the suspension.  This ensures you have places to enter the correct measurements, like Roll Bar measurements if your suspension has a roll bar. 

2. 
The program draws your suspension layout on the screen, including calculated dimensions like King Pin Angle, Instant Centers and the Roll Center in the Suspension Layout drawing.     

3. 
Once all measurements are entered, you can force the suspension into various amounts of Dive, Roll and Steer by selecting the Dynamic option at the top of the Main Screen.  As the suspension is redrawn with various amounts of Dive, Roll and Steer, the new Roll Center, Camber, Spring Length (compression), etc. are displayed.     

4. 
Watching Shock Length change is useful for matching the actual vehicle motion you see on the track. Dive and Roll so the shocks go through the range of motion indicated by your shock travel indicators. 

5. 
More in depth analysis is then available through Graphs, Reports, Adjust and other options listed at the top of the Main Screen on the Menu Bar. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.3, Explanation of Sections of Typical Menu (Other Specs menu shown here) 
Names of component specs. Click on them for a description in the Help frame in the lower left corner. 
Standard text entry box where you can type in a number for a spec. 
Drop down combo box. For some specs (like Chassis # and Customer) you can either type something in the box, or click on the arrow button to select a pre-programmed selection. For most others you can only select from a list of pre­programmed choices. 
Some specs have a Calc (calculate) button, where you can either enter the specs directly (in this case the Height of C.G.) or click on the Calc button to calculate it from other inputs. 
Comment text frame to enter a comment to describe these component specs. These comments are saved with the suspension specs in the Suspension Library. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.1 Main Screen Inputs and Outputs 
The Main Screen is shown in Figure 2.4 and shows a layout drawing of the suspension and various measurements and calculated results.  The Main Screen is made up of 5 basic sections as shown in Figure 2.4.  These are discussed in the next 5 sections.  The rest of this section gives an overview of how the Main Screen is organized. 
Figure 2.4 Main Screen 

2.1.1 Tabs 
Click on the tabs at the top of the screen to see the different views of the suspension, Front, Side and Top.  Selecting No View fills the entire screen with just the table. 
You will notice at the top of the Suspension Layout a Note:   
This is a view from the Front of Car (right side of screen is actually left side of car)   
There is a Preference called Main Screen View which lets you modify these views.  For example, Front view could be viewed from the front of the car, or from the rear of the car (the driver’s perspective).  This Preference affects the Front and Top views only. See Section 2.2 Preferences. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

2.1.2 Dynamic Motion Specs 
You must first select (click on) Dynamic to enable these 3 specs to be used.  Once they are enabled, you can type in most any setting within reasonable limits.  Note that if you enter too high a number, errors will be encountered in the calculations, and an Error Warning will appear at the top of the Suspension Layout. 
Dive 
The amount the car's front end drops compared to its static (standing still) height.  To simulate the front end rising, enter a negative (-) number. 
Roll 
The amount the car's front end rolls (leans) due to cornering forces, compared to its static (standing still) angle. A positive (+) angle means the car is leaning to the Right, typical of Left turns. Use a negative (-) number to lean Left (Right turns). 
Steer 
The amount the rack moves to the right for Rack and Pinion systems.  For Pitman Arm (steering box) steering systems, this is the amount the steering Pitman Arm’s attachment on the center link moves to the right. To move the rack or Pitman Arm to the left, enter a negative (-) number. 
2.1.3 Suspension Layout 
Figure 2.6 shows the suspension layout of the Main Screen, all 3 views.  The layout and data for the different sides is drawn in different colors: 
Left side = Red Right Side = Blue Common to Both = Black (roll bar in green) 
If you are doing dynamics, then the starting position of the chassis is drawn in gray for comparison. 
The layout screen includes some critical calculated parameters, which include: 
Camber Gain is the amount of change in Right and Left camber (in degrees) for  a set amount of suspension movement.  The default suspension movement when you get the program is set to 1 inch of dive, but you can set this to some other combination of Dive and Roll in the Preferences menu.  See Section 2.2, Preferences. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.6 Suspension Layout Camber Gain and the motion on which it is based is given in this line. Steering System
Currently viewed from Rear 

Pitman Arm & Idler Arm and centerlink Right Instant Center, drawn in blue. 
Roll Center, 
drawn in black. 
Left Instant Center drawn in red just like the right side suspension. The red arrow pointing off the screen shows its actual location is off the screen. 
Sway Bar (roll bar) drawn in green. 
Centerlink (drawn in gray) for steering system. 
Summary of critical calculated outputs. These are defined in this section. 

Rotation Axis for steering box Pitman arm and idler arm (not applicable for rack and pinion steering). 
Arrows showing front of car. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Caster Gain is the amount of change in Right and Left caster (in degrees) for  a set amount of suspension movement.  The default suspension movement when you get the program is set to 1 inch of dive, but you can set this to some other combination of Dive and Roll in the Preferences menu.  See Section 2.2, Preferences. 
Toe In Gain is the amount of change in Right and Left toe in (in degrees) for  a set amount of suspension movement.  The default suspension movement when you get the program is set to 1 inch of dive, but you can set this to some other combination of Dive and Roll in the Preferences menu.  See Section 2.2, Preferences. 
Roll Center Height is the height of the roll center for the current amount of Dive, Roll and Steering.  If Dynamics is not checked, then this would be the static roll center height, in inches above the ground. 
Roll Center Left/Right is the distance the roll center is right or left of center for the current amount of Dive, Roll and Steering.  If Dynamics is not checked, then this would be the static roll center distance left or right of center. 
Turn Radius, ft is the turning radius in feet for the current amount of Steer, based on the current wheelbase in the Other Specs menu.  If Dynamics are turned off or Steer is set to 0, this parameter is not displayed. 
Turn Toe In, “ is the Toe In (in inches) for the current amount of Steer, based on the current wheelbase in the Other Specs menu.  This is the same as total Ackerman Error (Left and Right combined) except it is expressed in inches and not degrees.  These inches are based on either the current tire diameters in the Suspension Data section, or some standard tire diameter, which can be specified in the Preferences menu.  See Section 2.2, Preferences. If Dynamics are turned off or Steer is set to 0, this parameter is not displayed. 
2.1.4 Suspension Data Grid 
Measurements are entered into the Suspension Data Grid at the bottom of the Main Screen.  Some of the boxes in this grid are for inputting measurements and some are for displaying calculated results.  The left column shows the name of the data for that row, and the 2nd left column (Type) shows if the data is an input or a calculated output.  Some inputs are marked "Input (clc)", where the (clc) stands for Calculate.  If you click on "Input (clc)" in the Type column, a new menu will appear where you can enter other information to calculate the original inputs for that row. 
Most measurements are to locate some point in space, for example the center of the upper ball joint  To locate this point requires 3 measurements:  "Out" measured out from the centerline of the car, "Height" measured up from the ground, and "Depth" measured back from the "axle" (a line connecting the center of the tire contact patches on the left and right side). You will use negative (-) numbers to enter Depth measurements in front of the "axle". These columns are labeled at the top of the Suspension Data grid for both the Left and Right side.  See Figure 2.4, page 15. 
Other inputs are just a single number for the Right and Left side, like Tire Track or Spring Rate.  Then you enter the value in the “Out” column.  Note that if you click on the scroll bar on the right side and slide down the report, the column names change to Static, Dynamic, and Difference.  See Figure 2.7 on this page. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
As measurements are entered, the program draws your suspension layout on the screen, including calculated dimensions like King Pin Angle, Instant Centers and the Roll Center.  You can click on the Front, Side and Top tabs at the top of the screen to view the suspension from different angles.  The drawings can help you spot errors you have made in your measurements or in entering the data. You can also select No View to see only the table, which is useful for watching several numbers change. 
Before we define the inputs in this section, lets take a minute to describe how you will make these measurements. 
Taking Suspension Measurements 
Park the car on a flat, level surface. First we must decide on what you will call the car’s centerline for measuring the “Out” measurements.  Many people use a distance half way between the left and right tire patches.  One disadvantage of this method is if you change rim widths or wheel offsets your centerline can change. This means all your Out measurements have now changed also.  Therefore, we usually recommend a distance half way between the frame rails, or the frame mounts on the lower arms.  These locations usually will stay in one place. In symmetric cars where the left and right side are identical, the centerline can also be the center of the engine and can be 

Once you decide on a centerline for a particular car, you must make all measurements from this same centerline. Once all measurements are taken, you can recenter the car using the Edit feature, Section 2.4. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Once you’ve decided on the centerline method you will use, use a tape measure to mark a point on the floor which is halfway between the your references, or drop a plumb bob from the center of the engine crankshaft.  This will now be your car’s centerline and is 0 in the Out (horizontal) direction in the Suspension Data Grid.  
Then with the plumb bob, place the string on the center of a new suspension point to be measured and drop the bob until it just touches the floor.  Measure the distance from the car's centerline to where the plumb bob points on the floor.  This is the Out distance for that particular suspension point. 
Height measurements are measured as you would expect, the distance up to the particular point from the ground. 
Depth measurements are somewhat more tricky, as they are measured from the axle line, which is a line connecting the center of the 2 wheels. If the car had a straight axle, this would be exactly at 0 Depth.  Points which are ahead of the axle are measured as a negative (-) Depth. For example, a point 4 inches ahead of the axle would have a Depth of -4.  See Figure 2.9. 
You can print a blank worksheet for recording your measurements by clicking on File at the upper left of the Main Screen (in the Menu Bar), then clicking on Print Blank Worksheet.  Be sure you have first selected the correct Other Specs (Steering Type, 

Spring Type, Roll Bar, etc.) by clicking on Other Specs at the top of the Main Screen to obtain the correct worksheet for your car. 
Other inputs are just a single number for the Right and Left side, like Tire Track or Spring Rate.  Then you enter the value in the “Out” column.  Note that if you click on the scroll bar on the right side and slide down the report, the column names change to Static, Dynamic, and Change.  See Figure 2.7. 
Tip:  You can enter fractions for measurements, like "9 3/8", and the program will convert this to the 
decimal equivalent of "9.375". 
Suspension Data Definitions (McPhearson Strut, see page 31) 
Upper Ball Joint (Upper McPhearson Strut, see page 31) 
The location of the Upper Ball Joint.  Measure to what you visualize to be the center of the ball inside the joint. 
Upper Frame Pivot, Front (Lower McPhearson Strut, see page 31) 
The location of the Front Frame Pivot for the upper A Arm or Wishbone. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Upper Frame Pivot, Rear 
The location of the Rear Frame Pivot for the upper A Arm or Wishbone.  
Lower Ball Joint 
The location of the Lower Ball Joint.  Measure to what you visualize to be the center of the ball inside the joint.  

Lower Frame Pivot, Front 
The location of the Front Frame Pivot for the lower A Arm or Wishbone.  On some suspensions, this may be the forward strut (sometimes called 'Drag Strut') which locates the main lower arm (like some Masterbuilt (tm) chassis or stock Fords). 
Lower Frame Pivot, Rear 
Figure 2.10A 
The location of the Rear Frame Pivot for the lower A Arm or Wishbone.  On some suspensions, this may be the rear strut which locates the main lower arm (like some Lefthander (tm) and Port City (tm) chassis). 
Tie Rod on Rack 
The location of the Tie Rod End as it attaches to the rack (rack and pinion steering) or the center link (Pitman arm steering systems). 

Tie Rod on Spindle 
The location of the Tie Rod End as it attaches to the wheel spindle. 
Figure 2.10B Steering Box Axis 
Steering Swivel Axis Upper 
A real or imaginary point which locates the TOP of the axis (imaginary line) about which the Idler Arm or steering box Pitman Arm rotates about.  See Figures 2.10A and 2.10B.  This point can also be created by clicking in “Input (clc)” Type in this row and using the Calculation Menu described in Section 2.8.5 on page 57. 
Steering Swivel Axis Lower 

A real or imaginary point which locates the BOTTOM of the axis (imaginary line) about which the Idler Arm or steering box Pitman Arm rotates about. See Figures 2.10A and 2.10B. This point can also be created by clicking in “Input (clc)” Type in this row and using the Calculation Menu described in Section 2.8.5 on page 57. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Center Link Pivots 
The location of the Idler Arm and Pitman Arm as they attach to the center link. 
Steering Sensor 
The location of the Attachment Point for the Steering Sensor (for a data logger) on either the rack or center link. 
Steering Sensor 
The location of the Attachment Point for the Steering Sensor (for a data logger) on the frame. 
Upper Spring Pad 
The location of the center of the spring pad at the top of the spring on the frame. 
Lower Spring Pad 
The location of the center of the spring pad at the bottom of the spring on the A Arm or Wishbone. 
Upper Shock Mount 
The location of the center of the top shock mount on the frame. 
Lower Shock Mount 
The location of the center of the bottom shock mount on the A Arm or Wishbone. 
Upper Sensor Mount 
The location of the center of the spring travel sensor (for a data logger) at the top on the frame. 
Lower Sensor Mount 
The location of the center of the spring travel sensor (for a data logger) at the bottom on the A Arm or Wishbone. 
Bellcrank Axis Front 
A real or imaginary point which locates the FRONT of the axis (imaginary line) about which the spring's Bellcrank or Rocker Arm rotates about. This spec is not used in this version. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Bellcrank Axis Front 
A real or imaginary point which locates the Back of the axis (imaginary line) about which the spring's Bellcrank or Rocker Arm rotates about. This spec is not used in this version. 
Pushrod Mount on Arm 
The location of the center of the spring's Pushrod as it mounts to the A Arm or Wishbone. This spec is not used in this version. 
Pushrod Mount on Bellcrank 
The location of the center of the spring's Pushrod as it mounts to the Bellcrank or Rocker Arm. This spec is not used in this version. 
Roll Bar Mount on Arm 
The location of the center of the Roll Bar's (roll bar's) attachment point on the A Arm or Wishbone. 
Roll Bar Mount on Frame 
The location of the center of the Roll Bar's (roll bar's) attachment point on the frame.  This spec is not used in this version. 
Spring Length 
The spring length calculated from the spring pad inputs above.  The Static Length is shown 3rd and 6th columns (leftmost column of the 3 columns for each side of the car).  The Dynamic Length (due to Dive, Roll and/or Steer) is shown to its right (4th and 7th column), and the difference is shown to its right (5th and 8th column). 
Spring Angle from Front 
The spring angle in degrees from vertical when viewed from the FRONT.  A positive angle tips toward the car's centerline at the top.  This is calculated from the spring pad inputs above.  The Static Angle is shown 3rd and 6th columns (leftmost column of the 3 columns for each side of the car).  The Dynamic Angle (due to Dive, Roll and/or Steer) is shown to its right (4th and 7th column), and the difference is shown to its right (5th and 8th column). 
Spring Angle from Side 
The spring angle in degrees from vertical when viewed from the SIDE.  A positive angle tips toward the car's rear at the top. This is calculated from the spring pad inputs above.  The Static Angle is shown 3rd and 6th columns (leftmost column of the 3 columns for each side of the car).  The Dynamic Angle (due to Dive, Roll and/or Steer) is shown to its right (4th and 7th column), and the difference is shown to its right (5th and 8th column). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Spring Rate/Wheel Rate 
The spring rate in pounds per inch (force required to compress the spring 1 inch).  Click on the "Input (clc)" and a menu will open where you can calculate a spring rate from other specs.  You can type in this number in the 3rd and 6th columns (leftmost column of the 3 columns for each side of the car).  The calculated Wheel Rate in pounds/inch (force required to move the wheel center up or dive the vehicle 1 inch) is shown to its right (4th and 7th column). 
Figure 2.11 Illustration of Camber, King Pin Axis and Scrub RadiusMtn. Ratio Spring/Shock/Sensor 
The motion ratio between the Spring/Shock/Sensor motion and the wheel's motion.  See Specs for Calculating Camber Gain in Section 2.2, Preferences on exactly how Motion Ratios are calculated. 
Track 
The track from the car's centerline and the center of the tire patch on the ground.  The Static Track is shown 3rd and 6th columns (leftmost column of the 3 columns for each side of the car). The Dynamic Track (due to Dive, Roll and/or Steer) is shown to its right (4th and 7th column), and the difference (called Tire Scrub) is shown to its right (5th and 8th column). 
Tire Circumference 

The circumference (distance around the outside) of the tire.  Click on the "Input (clc)" and a menu will open where you can calculate circumference from other specs.   
Tread Width 
The width of the tire's tread.  This is used only for drawing the front and top views to scale and not used for any calculations. 
Camber 
Camber is the degrees of tilt of the wheel with respect to the ground as viewed from the front, in degrees.  Negative (-) camber means the top of the wheel tilts in towards the car. See Figure 2.11. 
Caster 
Caster is calculated as the angle between vertical and a line connecting the two ball joints when viewed from the side, in degrees.  It is about the same as King Pin Angle, except viewed from the side.  Negative caster means the top ball joint is ahead of the lower ball joint. See Figure 2.12. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Caster Trail 
Caster Trail is the distance between the center of the tire contact patch and where the Caster Angle line hits the ground.  Negative (-) Caster Trail means the tire is ahead of where the Caster Line hits the ground, and is usually produced from negative caster angles. See Figure 2.12. 
Toe In, deg 
Toe In is the angle of the wheel when viewed from the top, in degrees. Positive Toe In means the front of the wheel is tilted in toward the center of the car. 
Toe In, inches 
Toe In, inches is the distance the front of the wheel is tilted in toward the center of the car. In the Preferences section, you can select to have this based on the tire circumference you've entered for this suspension (Lt/Rt), or some standard tire radius.  Selecting a standard tire radius lets you compare this number across any suspension, independent on the tires used for each.  Note that this is reported for each wheel separately, and that total Toe In would adding the left and right Toe In together.  Most racers, tuners and mechanics talk about total Toe In. For example, if 
Ideal Ackrmn Toe In, deg 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Ideal Ackerman Toe In is the angle in degrees for the left and right side which would produce perfect Ackerman Steering based on the steering inputs, Track and Wheelbase.  See Figure 2.13. 
Ackrmn Error, deg 
Ackerman Error is the difference in degrees between the "Toe In, degrees" and the "Ideal Ackerman, degrees" above. See Figure 2.14. 
King Pin Angle, deg 
King Pin Angle (or King Pin Inclination Angle ) is calculated as the angle between vertical and a line (called King Pin Axis) connecting the two ball joints when viewed from the front, in degrees.  It is about the same as Caster Angle, except viewed from the front. Negative King Pin Angle means the top ball joint is farther out from center than the lower ball joint. See Figure 2.11. 
Scrub Radius 
Scrub Radius is the distance from where the king pin axis hits the ground and the center of the tire patch. See Figure 2.11. 
King Pin Angle, deg 
The king pin axis is the line intersecting the upper and lower ball joints. See Figure 2.11. 
Spindle Angle, deg 
Spindle Angle is the angle between the King Pin Angle and Camber Angle in degrees.  As you change measurements, but you do not change the spindles, this angle should stay constant. See Figure 2.11. 
Instant Center Height 
The Instant Center is an imaginary point at the intersection of extension lines from the upper and lower A Arms or Wishbones.  The wheel moves up and down as if it were attached to a swing arm attached at this imaginary Instant Center.  Instant Center Height is the height of the Instant Center above ground.  If this is negative (-), it means the Instant Center is below ground. 
Instant Center Right or Left 
The Instant Center is an imaginary point at the intersection of extension lines from the upper and lower A Arms or Wishbones.  The wheel moves up and down as if it were attached to a swing arm attached at this imaginary Instant Center.  Instant Center Left and Right is the distance from Instant Center to the car's centerline, usually on the other side of the car.  For example, the Left side's Instant Center is usually on the right side of the car.  If this is negative (-), it means the Instant Center is on the same side of the car and is very short (very unusual). 
Roll Center Height 
Roll Center is an imaginary point about which the chassis tends to roll in cornering maneuvers.  In general, the lower the Roll Center, the more the car rolls in the corners.  The farther right the Roll Center, the less the right side moves up or down during cornering. The Roll Center is calculated at the intersection of imaginary lines connecting the tire contact patches to the Instant 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Centers. Roll Center Height is the height of the Roll Center above ground.  If this is negative (-), it means the Roll Center is below ground. 
Appendix 9, v2.4C features now includes Force Base (more accurate) or Kinetic Roll Center options. 
Roll Center Right or Left 
Roll Center Left and Right is the distance the Roll Center is left or right of the car's centerline.  See Roll Center Height above. 
Roll Stiffness, ft lb/deg 
Roll Stiffness, ft-lbs/deg is the amount of torque (in ft lbs) required to roll the car 1 degree.  This assumes the only compliance in the car is from the suspension's springs and roll bar, and everything else (tires, bushings, etc.) are perfectly stiff. 
Anti-Dive, % 
Anti Dive, % is the amount of resistance to dive from braking produced by the suspension geometry.  Theoretically, a car with 100% anti-dive will not dive at all during deceleration.  See Appendix 5, page 131. 
Upper Arm Len True/Frnt/Rr 
Upper Arm Length in front and rear is the distance from the center of the upper ball joint to the center of the upper front and rear arm mount.  This is calculated from other inputs and is shown here only to help you check and visualize these other inputs.  The true length is the length from the ball joint perpendicular to the axis of (imaginary line connecting) the front and rear frame 
Figure 2.14 A Illustration of Arm Lengths
pivots. This is also the closest distance to this axis. See Figure 
2.14A. 
Lower Arm Len True/Frnt/Rr 
Lower Arm Length in front and rear is the distance from the center of the lower ball joint to the center of the lower front and rear arm mount.  This is calculated from other inputs and is shown here only to help you check and visualize these other inputs. The true length is the length from the ball joint perpendicular to the axis of (imaginary line connecting) the front and rear frame pivots.  This is also the closest distance to this axis. See Figure 2.14A. 
Spindle Length 
Spindle Length is the distance from the centers of the upper and lower ball joints. This is calculated from other inputs and is shown here only to help you check and visualize these other inputs. 
Tire Rod Length 
Tie Rod Length is the distance from the tie rod mount on the spindle and the tie rod mount on either the rack or the center link. This is calculated from other inputs and is shown here only to help you check and visualize these other inputs. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.1.5 Main Screen Commands 
The next section discusses some of the commands available at the top of the Main Screen.  Most will not be discussed here in detail, as they are discussed in other sections of this manual. 
File (see Figure 2.15 for File Options) New (start new suspension) 
Click on File, then New to start a new suspension. This process will “walk you through” some critical steps to preparing a new Suspension File. You can select to keep certain data from the previous suspension like suspension comments, engine specs, etc. Keeping data can save you considerable time since you don’t have to type in information which may be the same as the current 
suspension. The New Suspension command is discussed in full detail in Section 2.9. 
Open (from all saved suspensions) 
This option presents the Open Suspension File menu discussed in Section 3.5, Suspension Libraries.  From there you have several options to open a previously saved suspension file from any place in the Suspension Library, or from most any place on the computer, including the floppy disk drive. 
Save 
Select Save if you want to save the current suspension and any recent changes to the same name as you are currently working with.  This is the file name shown in square bracket [ ] at the top of the Main Screen. 

Save As 
Select Save As if you want to save the current suspension and any recent changes to a new name or new folder. You will be presented with the menu discussed in Section 3.5 where you can change the suspension name, change the folder you are saving it to, or add a new folder name. 
Open from Floppy Drive Save to Floppy Drive 
The Open command provides a simple 1 click command to open a standard Windows “File Open” menu displaying the contents of the disk in the Floppy Drive. The Save command provides a simple 1 click command to save the current suspension file to the disk in the Floppy Drive to the same name as is currently being used.  These commands provide a convenient method for copying files from one computer to another.  The drive letter (A or B) that the program defaults to can be changed in the Preferences menu, Section 2.2. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Print 
Print Main Screen 
Select Print Main Screen to print all the data from the Suspension Data grin in a report. The Print Options menu will be presented as shown in Figure 
2.16. These options are explained in Section 3.4. 
Print Blank Worksheet 
Select Print Blank Worksheet to print a report with blanks for all inputs currently shown on the Main Screen and in the Other Specs menu. Note that the menu of Figure 2.16 will be presented momentarily as the worksheet is printed, then disappear. You do not have to click on any buttons in this menu. 

Note that if you will be measuring a suspension different than the current suspension, you may need to change the Other Specs first. For example, say the current suspension does not have a roll bar, but the one you will measure using the worksheet does.  Change this setting in the Other Specs menu to open up that row on the Suspension Data grid.  Then print the worksheet and roll bar inputs will be included. 
Windows Printer Setup 
The Windows Printer Setup lets you change your Windows default printer, paper orientation, etc. for printing reports or graphs in other areas of the program. 
Unlock Program Options 
The Suspension Analyzer is equipped with copy protection.  This ensures that legitimate users do not have to cover the costs for unauthorized distribution of the program.  When you first receive the program, it is in demo mode.  In demo mode you can try either the Basic version, or the full Professional version for ten days.  All features are working in demo mode. 
Sometime during those 10 days, you must call Performance Trends to obtain an “Unlocking Code”. 
Before you call Performance Trends, you should get your registered code number and computer hardware number.  These are available by clicking on File in the upper left hand corner of the Main Screen, then clicking on Unlocking Program Options.  A screen will appear as shown in Figure 2.17. See Section 1.2 for more information on how to unlock the program. 
Edit 
The Edit command lets you move a large group of measurements with one command, or copy measurements from the left side to the right side or vice versa. The Edit options are discussed in detail is Section 2.4, page 41. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Graphs 
The Graph command lets you graph several different types of data from the current suspension, either by itself or with data from other suspensions for comparisons.  The Graph options are discussed in detail is Section 3.3,  page 91. 
Reports 
The Report command lets you create reports of several different types of data from the current suspension.  The Report options are discussed in detail is Section 3.1, page 83. 
Other Specs 
The Other Specs command opens up the Other Specs menu. Other Specs are used to describe aspects of the suspension which can not broken down to the Left or Right side.  Many of these specs are quite critical for what inputs can be entered at the Main Screen. For example, if you set Roll Bar to None, no Roll Bar measurements are asked for at the Main Screen.  See Section 2.3, page 37. 
Adjust 
This powerful feature lets you change some component or adjustment on the chassis, and have all other suspension measurements change just as if you had made the change on the actual car.  This feature is discussed in detail in Section 2.5, page 43. 
Optimize 
This powerful feature lets you find a new location or adjustment for some selected suspension component which produces some optimum type of suspension characteristic.  One example, would be to move the left tie rod end to find minimum left side bump steer. See Section 2.6, page 47. 
Animate 
The Animate option lets you direct the suspension through a series of steps to simulate continuous motion, much as you would see on the actual test track or race track.  See Section 2.7, page 49. 
Preferences 
Preferences let you customize the program for your needs and for your computer and printer.  See Section 2.2, page 23. 
Help 
Click on Help for several options to help describe your options at the Main Screen, and for other information to help you understand how this program works. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
McPhearson Strut Inputs McPhearson Strut, Top 
Is a point through which the axis of the McPhearson Strut travels at its top location. 
McPhearson Strut, Bottom 
Is a point through which the axis of the McPhearson Strut travels at its bottom location.  Note that this is NOT the location where the strut actually attaches to the spindle. 
Figure 2.17 B McPhearson Strut Specs 
McPhearson Strut Top Not McPhearson Strut Bottom (do not measure to the attachment point of the strut to the spindle. 

McPhearson Strut Bottom (measured to a point on the axis of the strut’s motion) 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions (C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.2 Preferences 
The Preferences Menu has been expanded considerably in v2.0 and v2.4.  Check Appendix 6 and 7. 
Click on the Preferences item in the menu bar at the top of the Main Screen to bring up the Preferences menu shown in Figure 
2.18. Here you can adjust some program items to personalize the program for your needs. Preferences may also save time by eliminating steps you don't require. 
Program Title Comments 
Enter most any text here for the First and Second lines. These 2 lines will appear at the top of printouts and printed graphs. This is a good place for your business name or your personal name.  You can change these entries as often as you wish. 
Specs for 

Calculating Camber Gain 
Each time you make a change to a Suspension Data input, the program checks how that change affects static calculations, like spring length, roll center position, etc. It also moves the suspension through some standard movement, like 1 inch of dive, to see the effect on 3 critical specs: Camber, Caster and Toe In.  This change is called "gain" and is labeled in the suspension layout as Camber Gain, Caster Gain and Toe In Gain (often called Bump Steer).  The program's default standard movement is 1 inch of dive. However, you are able to change this to some combination of dive and/or roll.  These Gain numbers make for handy, quick checks on the impact of a certain modification.  For example, if you move a ball joint, and Toe In Gain increases, you know immediately that this change will increase Bump Steer. 
If you change the standard movement from 1" Dive to 1/2" dive, then the Gain numbers reported will drop by approximately half. You can only make comparisons on Gain numbers calculated for equal standard motions. 
During this standard movement, the program also checks on how much the springs (and shocks and roll bar, if any) compress (twist in the case of the roll bar) for this standard movement.  Knowing how far the spring compresses for a given amount of wheel movement is the precise way the program calculates the spring (and shock and roll bar, if any) Motion Ratio.  Unlike the Gain numbers, the Motion Ratios calculated are corrected for changes in the standard motion.  This means a Motion Ratio calculated for 1" Dive will be close to the Motion Ratio for 1/2" dive. 
Note, however, that if the standard movement is very small, Motion Ratio accuracy will not be good.  For example, say the standard motion is 1/2" Dive and 2 deg Roll.  The left side wheel may go through a 1" of travel, but the right side may go only 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
through .05" travel. The right side Motion Ratio will not be accurate.  Therefore, for accurate Motion Ratio calculations, we recommend you use the default standard motion of 1"  Dive (or at least avoid Roll as a standard motion). 
Use Alternate Location for Files 
Some users (typically those on a network) may need to store their data files in a location other that in the 3D-DATA folder in the SUSPANZR folder (the folder containing the actual Suspension Analyzer program).  For example, you may want to put the files on the E drive so other computers can access them.  If so, choose Yes and then the spec Path to Files will be enabled. 
In most all situations (except for network users) it is STRONGLY recommended you keep this marked No. 
It is also STRONGLY recommended that if you do choose Yes, that you do NOT keep changing this back and forth from No to Yes.  This will produce possible errors when saving or opening files. This will be due mostly to saving them in one location and then looking for them in another location. 
Path to Files 

If you set the previously described Use Alternate Location for Files spec to Yes, this spec becomes enabled.  Enter the full path to the new location for the Suspension Analyzer data files.  For example, if you want to store the files on the E drive, enter the path: 
E:\ 
Either before you make this change in the Preferences menu, or immediately after that change, you must copy the Suspension Analyzer data folder (directory)  3D-DATA to the new location on the E drive (in the root directory).  
If this process seems complicated or you are not familiar with Windows copy commands or folders, DO NOT use this option.  Keep the spec Use Alternate Location for Data Files set to No. 
Default Floppy Disk Drive 
Choose the letter of the floppy disk drive on your computer, usually A .  This is the disk drive which will be first opened when using the Save to Floppy Disk or Open from Floppy Disk File commands at the Main Screen. 
XYZ Axis to Use for Measurements 
To be consistent with our smaller Roll Center Calculator and Circle Track Analyzer programs, we have adopted the notation that Out from the car's centerline is an X measurement, and Height up from the ground is a Y measurement.  Then the last measurement of Depth is a Z measurement.  However, some users are used to other coordinate systems, where Depth is X, Out 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
is Y, and Height is Z. You can choose either notation with this spec.  This only changes the labels on the columns in the Suspension Data grid on the Main Screen. 
Tire Size Used for Toe In, inches 
Toe In in degrees is an absolute measurement, and does not depend on tire size.  However, Toe In in inches does depend on tire size, or the tire size assumed by the Toe In Gauge you are using.  Therefore, you have options here to assume different standard tire sizes, or use the tire size based on the Circumference you enter in the Suspension Data grid on the Main Screen. 
Draw Front View Extension Lines 
Choose Yes to draw extension lines on the Suspension Layout, to better illustrate how the Instant Centers and Roll Center locations are calculated. Choose No to avoid clutter on the screen.  Extension Lines are drawn on the Front View Layout only. 
Printer Fonts 
Choose which basic type of font to use for printouts.  You may not get your choice if your printer does not support that particular font. 
Printed Graph Width, % of Page 
Due to the endless combinations of computers, Windows setups and printers, some printed graphs may not fill the page, some may extend off the page to the right.  This option lets you expand (% greater than 100) or shrink (% less than 100) the printed graph to better fit the page. 
Always Autoscale New Graph 
Choose Yes for 'Always Autoscale New Graph' and each time you do a new graph, the graph is autoscaled (program picks the scales to show all data). This is usually the best for beginners.  Choose No and any manual scales you have set will be maintained for each new graph, until you quit the program. 
Suspension Folder Name 
The Suspension Analyzer saves suspension files under different folders (directories) under the main folder 3D-DATA.  Some users may prefer to have the 'Folder' be called ‘ChassisType' or 'Customer', depending how they choose to organize their suspensions. Your entry here of most any text is what the program will use to call the different folders where suspension files are stored. 
Adding Shims 
In the Adjust Feature of Shimming the Upper A Arms, Adding Shims can either move the arms farther out or farther in.  Select the action which Adding Shims will produce on most the cars you work on. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

of the tip. See Figure 2.21. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.3 Other Specs 
For Full Vehicle version, this is called “Vehicle Specs”. Check Appendices at back of book for these new features. 

Other Specs are used to describe aspects of the suspension which can not broken down to the Left or Right side.  Many of these specs are quite critical for what inputs can be entered at the Main Screen.  For example, if you set Roll Bar to None, no Roll Bar measurements are asked for at the Main Screen.  See Figure 2.22. 
Figure 2.22 Other Specs Menu 
These 5 specs help determine what data can be entered in the
There are 2 basic ways to enter or 
Suspension Data grid on the Main Screen.
change specs in this menu: 
These specs are used only for the Adjust Ride
1 You can click on a spec value 
Height feature described in Section 2.5
and change the current setting or type in a new one.  If your entry is outside the typical range, a message is given showing the limits, and the setting is switched back to its original value. 
2 Some specs are picked from a list called a "Combo Box".  An example would be Roll Bar, where there are 2 choices either None or Yes. Click on these specs or the "down arrow button" to the right of the specs to be presented with the list, then click on your choice from the list. 
Some Combo Boxes (like Customer and Chassis #) let you pick from a list, or type in a new entry.  If you type in a new entry (like a new customer), it will be added to the list. 

Help definition for spec currently highlighted

Height of C.G., inches 
Enter most any comments to describe this suspension 
or modifications you have made.

Height of the vehicle's Center of Gravity. This measurement is used 
These specs are for information only and are not used for calculations. 
for % Anti-Dive, % Anti-Squat, and the new FLLD (handling) calculations introduced in v2.0.  If you are not sure, use 20 inches.  Because most vehicle mass is concentrated in the engine and driveline, some people recommend estimating this at 5” above the height of the engine’s crankshaft. Click on the Calc Button to calculate from readings made during a special test.  See Section 2.8.1. 
% Front Braking 
The percent of the vehicle's total braking force which is produced by the front wheels. This measurement is only used for % Anti-Dive calculations. If you are not sure, use 65%. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Wheelbase, inches 
The distance from the vehicle's front wheel center to the vehicle's rear wheel center. This measurement is used for % Anti-Dive and Ackerman calculations.  If you are not sure, use 100 inches. 
Steering 
Click on the down arrow key to select the type of steering.  Your choice will determine what inputs are required to describe the steering geometry at the Main Screen. 
Springs 
Click on the down arrow key to select the type of suspension springs.  Your choice will determine what inputs are required to describe the spring and/or shock mounting locations at the Main Screen.  
Roll Bar 
Click on the down arrow key to select the type of anti-roll bar, if any.  Your choice will determine what inputs are available to describe the anti-roll bar mounting locations at the Main Screen.  
Roll Bar Rate, lb/in 
The 'spring rate' of the anti-roll bar in pounds per inch.  Click on the Calc Button to calculate the rate from anti-roll bar measurements.  See Section 2.8.2. 
Symmetric Chassis (Lt same as Rt) 
Click on the down arrow key to specify if the chassis is Symmetric (ALL left side specs are the same as the right side).  Your choice will determine if only specs for 1 side are needed at the Main Screen.  
Chassis # 
Type in most any name or number combination up to 20 characters to identify this chassis or front suspension, or click on the down arrow key to pick from a list of previously used numbers. 
Customer 
Type in most any name up to 20 characters to identify the owner of this head, or click on the down arrow key to pick from a list of previously used customers.   
Susp. Travel Sensor 
Click on the down arrow key to select the type of suspension travel sensor being used by a data acquisition system, if any.  Your choice will determine if inputs are required to describe the mounting points of sensors at the Main Screen.  
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Steering Sensor 
Click on the down arrow key to select the type of steering sensor being used by a data acquisition system, if any. Your choice will determine if inputs are required to describe the mounting points of a sensor at the Main Screen.   
Ride Height 
Lt Side, From Centerline 
Enter the distance from the car's centerline to where you measure ride height on the Left side.   
Lt Side, Behind Wheel Center 
Enter the distance back from the center of the wheel or spindle to where you measure ride height on the Left side.  If you measure ride height in front of the spindle, enter a negative (-) number.   

Rt Side, From Centerline 
Enter the distance from the car's centerline to where you measure ride height on the Right side.   
Rt Side, Behind Wheel Center 
Enter the distance back from the center of the wheel or spindle to where you measure ride height on the Right side.  If you measure ride height in front of the spindle, enter a negative (-) number. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions (C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.4 Edit Options 
Copy commands shown in Figure 2.24 and the Move Options shown in the Menu of Figure 2.25. 
Edit - Copy Commands 
The Swap command lets you copy all Right side measurements to the Left side, and copy the Left side measurements to the Right. 
The Copy commands only copy one side’s measurements onto the other side. This command can be handy for creating a symmetrical chassis.  You only need to enter measurements for one side, then copy that side’s measurements onto the other side for a perfectly symmetric (mirror image) chassis. 

Move Groups of Measurements 
This screen lets you modify (move) groups of Suspension Data points.  For example, you could move all the suspension points up 1 inch as if you had changed vehicle ride height, or to correct a mistake in measuring.  This can be very handy when doing measurements on a surface plate.  Say that the car's axle line (0 line for measuring depth) ends up being 1.25 inches ahead of 0 on the surface plate. You can still do all your measurements, but when you are done, use the Edit command to move all measurements back 1.25 inches. Now the axle line would fall exactly on 0.0. 
First select the group of points you want to Move.  
• 
All points would be selected for the 2 examples given above. 

• 
Steering System is useful for moving the rack or Steering Box, Idler Arm and Center Link to a new location. 

• 
Left Side Only and Right Side Only can be useful for simulating chassis modifications and for correcting measurement errors. 

• 
Center Car based on Tire Tracks is useful for recentering all measurements if you change wheel offsets, tire widths, etc., and you want to keep the car's centerline exactly centered between the 2 tire patches. 


Then select the Direction you want to move the selected points. 
Then enter the distance you want to move the selected points. 
Then Click on the 'Move Points' button to perform the Move. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
When you Edit points, you simply move measurements.  This could mean that the lengths of links could change (physically impossible unless you change or modify parts).  If you want to simulate moving selected points around, but keep all lengths the same, use the Adjust feature.  See Figure 2.26 below and  Section 2.5, Adjust Feature. 
Figure 2.26 Difference Between Moving Points and Adjusting Points 
Starting Condition Move All Points Up 2”  Adjust (shim) Upper Arm Frame Pivots Up 2 “ 
All points simply move up, camber does not change Camber (and Caster which can not be seen here) change as would happen with the actual suspension. Lengths of all Arms and Spindle stays the same. Only Upper Frame Pivot points move up (both front and rear were selected to move). 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.5 Adjust Options 
Click on Adjust at the top of the Main Screen for the Adjust Options shown in Figure 2.7. These options fall into the 3 basic types shown: 
• 
Shimming the Upper Arm Frame Pivots either in/out or up/down. 

• 
Changing the Wheel/Tire Offset which changes Track. 

• 
Making adjustments which change Ride Height 


Clicking on Steering System just refers you to the Edit menu, which is the only way to move the steering system as a unit.  See Section 2.4. Also see Example 4.3 for using the Adjust Option. 
Shimming 

This powerful feature lets you shim (change or adjust) the Front and/or Rear Frame Mounts for the upper control arms (A Arms or Wishbones).  You can shim this arm and have all other suspension measurements change just as if you had made the change on the actual car. 
For example, at the Main Screen you can change the Frame Mounts for the upper arms and only that measurement changes. That is a useful method when you are first entering measurements for the car. However, on the actual car, if you, say, shim out the front, left Frame Pivot, you will likely move the upper ball joint out and back, changing camber and caster.  You could also push the left tire down somewhat, tilting up the left side of the chassis. All measurements tilt up, and there would be some small change in some measurements moving to the right. This feature can simulate all these changes that you would see on the actual car.  See Figure 2.29. 
To use this feature, first pick whether you will Add or Remove shims for either the Front or Back mount, or both. Then select whether you want to use standard sixteenth (1/16) and eighth (1/8) inch shims, or to enter some other 'Custom' shim adjustment. After your selection, the lower inputs will become enabled as appropriate.  Selecting 'No Shims' disables the lower inputs and keeps that mounting point unchanged.  The total shim thickness will be displayed for both the Front and Back mount, and the change in Caster and Camber. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.29 Difference Between Moving Points and Adjusting Points 
Starting Condition Move All Points Up 2”           Adjust (shim) Upper Arm Frame Pivots Up 2 “ 

The entries and suspension layout on the Main Screen are not updated until you click on 'Use Calc Value'. 
Important: This menu can either assume that Adding shims or Removing shims moves the Frame Pivot either farther out from the car’s centerline.  The Notes section of Figure 4.28 shows it is currently set to Removing shims to move the arm out.  Depending on the type of suspensions you most often work on, you can select the default action at the Preferences menu.  See Section 2.2. If your chassis is opposite to the current Preference setting, select 'Remove Shims' if you are actually adding shims or 'Add Shims' if you are actually removing shims. 
Making a Shim adjustment can change most all your measurements. It is highly recommended you save your current Suspension File (click on 'File', then 'Save' or 'Save As' at the top left of the Main Screen) before you make a Shim Adjustment. 
Adjusting Ride Height 
This powerful feature lets you change some component or adjustment on the chassis, and have all other suspension measurements change just as if you had made the change on the actual car.   
For example, at the Main Screen you can change the Tire Circumference and only that measurement changes.  That is a useful method when you are first entering measurements for the car.  However, on the actual car, if you installed, say, a larger circumference tire on the Left side, the left side would go up and the chassis would tilt up on the left side.  All measurements tilt up, and there would be some small change in some measurements moving to the right.  There would also be a change in Left and 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Right Camber due to this tilt of the chassis by changing only the left side tire size. This feature can simulate all these changes that you would see on the actual car. See Figure 2.31. 
To use this feature, first pick the type of adjustment you want to make, then pick the side, Left, Right or Both Left and Right.  Then the appropriate inputs will be enabled for you to change.   
As you specify the changes you want, the Ride Heights are calculated and updated so you can see the effect. However, to accurately see Ride Height changes, you must first enter accurate Ride Height locations in the Other Specs menu.  These locations show where you are measuring Ride Height, how many inches behind the "axle" (a line connecting the left and right wheel centers) and how far from the car's centerline.  See Section 2.3, Other Specs on how the Ride Height locations are entered. 
The 'Jacking on Spring' Adjustment option assumes you jack on the spring until the ride height on that side changes the amount you specify.  This Adjust screen does not tell you how many turns to make on the jacking screw to get this ride height change. 
Note: When you make a change on just 1 side, the program shows how much Ride Height changes on that side.  More than likely there is also a small change in ride height on the other side of the car. 
Making a Ride Height adjustment can change most all your measurements. It is highly recommended you save your current Suspension File (click on 'File', then 'Save' or 'Save As' at the top left of the Main Screen) before you make a Ride Height Adjustment. 

Figure 2.31 Adjusting Ride Height with Tire Circumference Change 
Starting Condition Change Tire Circumference Change Tire Circumference by Entering new Value Using the Adjust Ride Height 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Left Wheel/Tire Offset Right Wheel/Tire Offset 
These Adjust options let you specify how you are changing the tire track by changing wheels and/or wheel spacers. You first specify the current wheel you are using in the upper section.  In the lower section you enter specs for the new wheel and/or spacers. The output at the top of the screen shows the current Track and the new proposed Track. 
Unlike the other Adjust features, this one only changes 1 measurement on the Main Screen. That’s because it only moves the Track (wheel and tire) if or out from the car’s centerline.  It does not change the height of any points because it assumes the tire circumference does not change.  If tire circumference is changing also when you make this wheel change, you must use the Adjust Ride Height feature for changing Tire Circumference also. 
Rim Offset (backspacing) 
The distance from the inside of the wheel rim to the wheel's mounting surface, sometimes called backspacing. This is usually measured by laying the wheel face up on the floor and measuring from the floor to the mounting surface. 
Rim Width 

Width of the wheel rim from inside bead to bead, in inches. This measurement is usually about 1” less than measuring from outside edge to outside edge. 
Wheel Spacer Width 
Some racers user spacers between the hub and the wheel. Enter the width of any spacer you are using, or leave the spacer spec blank (or set to 0) if you are not using spacers. 
The New Track for the appropriate side on the Main Screen is not updated until you click on 'Use Calc Value'. The calculation assumes the rim “lip” thickness is the same for both the current and new wheel, which is a safe assumption in most cases. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.6 Optimize Options 
Check Appendix 6 for a new Optimize option to adjust Handling, FLLD% (front lateral load distribution). 
This powerful feature lets you find a new location or adjustment for a selected suspension component which produces some “optimum” type of suspension characteristic.  (See Example 4.3)  One example, would be to move the left tie rod end to find minimum left side bump steer. 
Note that some “Optimum” setting arrived at by this feature may not actually produce optimum handling or safety. It only means that some suspension characteristic falls into some mathematical range. The changes proposed by this feature to obtain improvement in one characteristic, may completely “screw up” other suspension characteristics, making the car unsafe to drive. If you accept some proposed change, you must check all other suspension characteristics to ensure safe vehicle handling. 
To use this feature, first pick what suspension component you want to move.  You will notice that some components are identified with "Move" and some with "Shim".  If you select Shim Left or Right Upper A Arm, you are simulating actual shimming, so that Camber and Caster and several other conditions are also changing, just as it would in the actual suspension. See Section 2.5, Adjust Feature. You are 
also moving the both the front and rear Frame Mounts the same amount, which should produce only small caster changes if any. 
If you select "Move", then only the components you move are changing.  This is usually for Steering components, which is still realistic. If you move a steering component, you will likely readjust the Tie Rod lengths to bring Toe In back to the desired amount. 
After selecting the Component to move or shim, then select how far to move it from its current location. For example, to simulate shimming the left Tie Rod End up and down a range of 1" from the current location (2 inches total range), you would enter 1 for Up and 1 for Down. You can also select the increment for making adjustments.  Note that you may want to start with a large increment to see if anything significantly 

better than the current condition can be found. If so, then try a smaller increment.  On slower computers trying large ranges of changes with small increments, an Optimization may take up to an hour. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Then select the amount of suspension Dive and Roll motion to check.  If you know your suspension only goes through 1" of Dive and 1" of rise (negative dive), then only select 1" Dive to 1" Rise.  Do not select 3" Dive to 3" Rise, as this will take longer to calculate, and the optimum setting obtained for 3" movement may not be the best for only 1" movement. 
Then select what you want to obtain from the suspension.  Note that Steering Component changes are usually optimized to obtain minimum Bump Steer, and Shimming Upper Arms are optimized for Roll Center movement. 
Then click on the Optimize button.  Depending on the conditions you have set, the Optimize routine make several minutes.  If it is taking a long time, you can click on the Cancel button to stop Optimizing.  Then you can change some settings and try again. 
When calculations are finished, the program will present you with what it recommends for an adjustment, and how much improvement was obtained.  You can then select whether you want to accept the suggestion, or cancel.  If you accept the suggestion, you should then check the results obtained by graphing the new "Optimized" suspension with the old suspension.  What the program has found to be "optimum" may look good to the program and fit the criteria "minimum total bump steer", but may not be what you expected. 
Accepting an Optimized adjustment can change most all your measurements. It is highly recommended you save your current Suspension File (click on 'File', then 'Save' or 'Save As' at the top left of the Main Screen) before you make a Shim Adjustment. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.7 Animate 
The Animate feature lets you force the suspension through a series of movements, similar to what it would do in actual racing or driving situations. Click on Animate at the top of the Main Screen to be presented with the menu of Figure 2.34.  You can select however many different motion sequences and motion types from 1 through 4.  The animated motion always starts and ends at 0 Dive, 0 Roll and 0 Steer.   
Chose the types of motion and then enter the final extent of the motion for the first through fourth segment.  When you have entered info for the number of segments you want, click on the “Animate” button to start the process. You will be returned to the Main Screen with the Suspension Layout drawing going through the motions specified. The individual specs of this screen are defined below.000 
First Motion 
Select the type of motion for the first segment, either Dive, Roll or Steer. 

Figure 2.35 Main Screen in Animation 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Ending Position 
Enter the last position you want for the motion specified above.  In Figure 2.34, the Animation will start at 0 Roll and finish at 2 degrees of Roll at the end of the first segment.  Steer and Dive will both start segment 1 at 0 and end segment 1 at 0, no change. 
Second Motion 
Select the type of motion for the second segment, either Dive, Roll or Steer.  Note that if you do not choose a motion here, the Animation will consist of only 1 segment. 
Ending Position 
Enter the last position you want for the motion specified above.  In Figure 2.34, the Animation will start at 0 Roll and finish at 2 degrees of Roll at the end of the first segment, and at 1 inch of Dive at the end of segment 2.  Steer will start segment 1 and 2 at 0 and end segment 2 at 0, no change. 
Third Motion 
Select the type of motion for the third segment, either Dive, Roll or Steer. Note that if you do not choose a motion here, the Animation will consist of only 2 segments. 
Ending Position 
Enter the last position you want for the motion specified above.  In Figure 2.34, the Animation will start at 0 Roll and finish at 2 degrees of Roll at the end of the first segment, and at 1 inch of Dive at the end of segment 2, and at 1.4 inches of steer at the end of segment 3. 
Fourth Motion 
Select the type of motion for the fourth segment, either Dive, Roll or Steer. Note that if you do not choose a motion here, the Animation will consist of only 3 segments. 
Ending Position 
Enter the last position you want for the motion specified above.  In Figure 2.34, the Animation will start at 0 Roll and finish at 2 degrees of Roll at the end of the first segment, and at 1 inch of Dive at the end of segment 2, and at 1.4 inches of steer at the end of segment 3, and -1 inches of dive (1 inch rise) at the end of segment 4. 
At the end of segment 4, the program will force the suspension gradually back to the starting conditions of 0 Roll, 0 Dive and 0 Steer. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8 Calculation Menus 
Check Appendix 6 and 7 for new Calculation Menus in v2.0 and 2.4. 
The following section explains the user input for specs listed with Clc buttons, or are identified with a Data Type of “Input (clc)” in the Suspension Data grid on the Main Screen.  These specs are ones where you can simply enter a value, or click on the Clc button or “Input(clc)” and the program will present a menu of inputs which will calculate that particular parameter.  These menus are like computer “scratch pads” for calculating specs like Spring Rate, Height of C.G., Tire Circumference, etc. from other inputs. 
Notes: 
The starting values in each calculation menu are usually blanked out when the menu is opened.  If there is other information in the program to estimate what one of your input values will be, it may be loaded.  As shown in Figure 2.39, the Wheelbase is already available based on its setting in the Other Specs menu, and this value is loaded into the Calculation Menu.  You are free to change them to any other value. 
Once enough specs have been entered, the calculated value(s) at the top of the menu will be displayed.  This calculated value(s) will now be updated each time you change a spec.  If you want to use this calculated value, click on Use Calc Value. If the calculated value is within expected limits, it will be loaded into the original menu.  If you click on Cancel, you will be returned to the original menu with the original value unchanged. If you click on Help, you will be given a general explanation of calculation menus, and a page # in this section for more info about the particular menu you are using. 

The input values or calculated values in any calculation menu have NO affect on calculated performance unless you load the Calculated value into the original menu.  If you already know a spec in the form required by the program, then you have no need to use the calculation menu.  For example, if you know the Spring Rate is 950 lbs/inch,  then you have no need to use a calculation menu to calculate Spring Rate from Wire Diameter, Coil Diameter and Number of Coils. 
2.8.1 Calc C.G. Height 
This menu is available by clicking on the C.G. Height Clc button in the Other Specs menu.   
The procedure to determine C.G. height requires one end of the car to be raised while accurately measuring the wheel weights on the other end of the car before and after the car is raised.  The suspension must be blocked so the springs do not compress during the process. This can be done by replacing the shocks with solid links that maintain the vehicle’s free standing height. 
Raising a typical car about 20 inches (quite a lot) will only show a weight increase of 30-60 lbs for most cars.  Therefore, this process requires very precise weight measurements.  Some tips to improve the accuracy of the procedure include: 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
• 
Wiggle the car slightly on the scale to ensure it always returns to the same weight, both when level and when one end lifted. 

• 
The higher you raise the car, the more weight difference you will see and the more accurate results. 

• 
The test should be run with the driver and all fluid levels at race conditions. 

• 
Do the entire test more than once and average the C.G. height results. 


This procedure can be dangerous if not done with care and using good equipment. Take the proper precautions, especially if you raise the car significantly. 
Wheelbase, in 
Wheelbase of the car in inches, the distance from the front wheel center (or front axle line) to the rear wheel center (or rear axle line). 
Total Vehicle Weight, lbs 
The total weight of the vehicle, ideally with the driver and all fluid levels at 
race conditions. 
Total Front (Rear) Weight, lbs 
The weight on the front tires (or rear tires if the front of the car is raised) on level ground in pounds, before the car is raised. 
Raise Front or Rear 
Choose which end of the car is raised for this test, usually the rear. 

Front (Rear) Tire Radius, in 
The radius of the front tire (or rear tire if the front of the car is raised). 
Distance Raised, in 
The distance the one end of the car is raised, in inches. 
New Total Front (Rear) Weight, lbs 
The new weight on the front tires (or rear tires if the front of the car is raised) when the car has been raised. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.8.2 Tire Circumference Tread Width 
This calculation is available from the Suspension Data grid on the Main Screen and allows you to estimate Tire Circumference and Tread Width for certain Tire Rating Types.  Click on “Input (clc)” for either Tire Circumference or Tire Width calculation menu. 
Side 
Figure 2.39 Rolling Radius 

Click on this combo box to select which tire you want to calculate specs for. 
Rating Type 
Click on this combo box for the following rating types: 
• 
P-Metric (ex P225-60-15) 

• 
Letter (ex G-60-15) 

• 
Rolling Radius, inches 

• 
Diameter, inches 


Depending on your choice, certain specs will become enabled.  If you choose the P-Metric or Letter Type, you will also be able to calculate the Tread Width. 
P Metric Tire Size (ex 225) 
Identifies the tire's cross sectional width in millimeters and is also related to the tire's load carrying capacity. 
Letter Tire Size 
Identifies the tire's load carrying capacity.  Click on this combo box to select one of the letters. This is an older rating system and there is more variation across different manufacturers. 
Aspect Ratio 
Is the ratio of tire cross sectional height to cross sectional width.  A 75 series tire has a height 75% as high as its cross sectional width, and is generally a tall tire. A 50 series tire is a lower profile tire, more suited to cornering and performance. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Wheel Rim Diameter 
Is the diameter of the wheel's rim. 
Rolling Radius, in 
Is the tire's radius, measured with the tire mounted on the car, with the tire on the ground with typical vehicle weight on  it.  Radius is the distance from the center of the tire to the ground.  See Figure 2.39. 
Diameter, in 
Is the tire's diameter measured in inches.  Diameter is the distance across the tire.  See Figure 2.39. 
2.8.3 Calc Spring Rate 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the “Input (clc)” data Type at the Suspension Data grid for entering Spring Rate. 
Spring Location 
Click on this combo box to select which spring location you are calculating a spring rate for, either the Left spring, Right Spring or both springs. 
Type of Spring 
Click on the combo box for Type of Spring to change the inputs in this menu for the 4 basic types of springs: 
• 
Coil Springs 

• 
Leaf Springs 

• 
Solid Torsion Bars 

• 
Hollow Torsion Bars These inputs will be discussed in the 3 sections below 


Coil Springs 
Wire Diameter, in 
Is the diameter of the wire which makes up the coils, in inches.  Take this measurement carefully as it has a large impact on the results. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Inside Diameter of Coil, in 
Is the inside diameter of the wire coils which makes up the spring, in inches.  The coil diameter ranges from 1.5 to 5 inches for most springs. 
Number of Active Coils 
Is the number of active coils in the spring.  Usually the top and bottom coils of a spring do not move (are not active) and do not contribute to the “springiness” of the spring.  To be more precise, do not count any part of the coil spring which is touching the spring mounting pad.  Therefore the number of active or moving coils is usually 2 less than the total number of coils.  For example, for a spring with 12 coils, the Number of Active Coils would usually be 10.  Note that you can enter partial coils, or that the Number of Active Coils can include a decimal fraction, like 10.5 coils.  
Leaf Springs 
# of Leaves at Center 
Is the number of individual leaves at the center of the leaf spring, where the axle attaches.  For a single leaf this would be 1. 
# of Leaves at Ends 
Is the number of individual leaves within 2 inches of the front and rear mounting points on the vehicle frame.  Usually this is 1. 
Spring Length, in 
Is the length of the main leaf spring in inches, usually 20 to 60 inches. 
Thickness of One Leaf, in 
Is the average thickness of each individual leaf, in inches.  Take this measurement carefully, as it has a large impact on the results. 
Spring Width, in 
Is the average width of each leaf, in inches.  This usually ranges from 1 to 3 inches. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
Figure 2.42 Torsion Bar Specs             Arm Length 
Torsion Bars 
Torsion Bar Diameter, in 
Is the outside diameter of the section of the bar which is designed to twist, in inches. Take this measurement carefully as it has a large impact on the results.  See Torsion Bar Length below. 
Torsion Bar Length, in 
Is the length of the bar which is designed to twist, which is usually the thinnest part of the bar. See Figure 2.42. 
Lever Arm Length, in 
Is the distance from the bar to where the bar attaches or rests on the axle. See Figure 2.42. For the Front Suspension, this is usually the length of the lower A Arm, from the center of the torsion bar to the ball joint. 
Bar Inside Diameter, in 

                       Bar Outside Diameter 


                          Active Bar Length 

Is the inside diameter of the torsion bar if you have selected a Hollow Torsion Bar, in inches. 
2.8.4 Calc Roll Bar Rate 
This Calculation menu is available by clicking on the Roll Bar Rate Clc button in the Other Specs menu. 
Type of Bar 
Click on this combo box to select from the following 3 types of roll bars: 
• 
No Roll Bar 

• 
Solid Bar 

• 
Hollow Bar 


Bar Outside Diameter, in 
Is the outside diameter of the section of the bar which is designed to twist, in inches. Take this measurement carefully as it has a large impact on the results. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017  Suspension Analyzer  Chapter 2 Definitions  
Bar Inside  Figure 2.44 Roll Bar Measurements  
Diameter, in  Production Style Bar                                      Custom Style Bar 
Is the inside diameter                              Bar Outside Diameter                                       Bar Outside Diameter 

of the torsion bar if 

                                           Arm
 Length 
you have selected a Hollow Roll Bar, in inches. 
Active Bar 


                     Active Bar Length                                           Active Bar Length 
Length, in 
Is the length of the bar which is designed to twist, which is usually the thinnest part of the bar.  See Figure 2.44. 
Arm Length, in 
Is the distance from the bar to where the bar attaches to the suspension.  See Figure 2.44. 
Appendix 9, v2.4C features now greatly expands Roll Bar Calculator capabilities. 
2.8.5 Steering Axis 
The Steering Axis is only used to describe the motion of Pitman arm steering members.  It is a more complicated  to understand than some of the other measurements.  This axis represents the axis about which either the idler arm or steering box Pitman arm rotates. See Figure 2.45. 
The program needs any 2 points on this axis to describe the axis completely.  Rather than asking you to measure to 2 (perhaps imaginary) points, you can use the Steering Axis 
Figure 2.45 Illustration of Steering Axis Inputs 
calculation menu to enter angles to describe the axis. 
Side 
Select which side you are calculating axis points for, either left side (typically steering box in the United States) or right side (typically the idler arm in the United States). 
Steering Arm Points To 
Select if the steering arm (Pitman arm from the steering box or idler arm) either points to the front of the car or the rear of the car.  If the arm points toward the rear, then the axis is in front of the pivot point, as 




(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 

shown in Figure 2.45. 
Steering Arm Length 
Measure the length of the steering arm (Pitman arm from the steering box or idler arm) from the pivot to the axis.  See Figure 2.45. 
Steering Arm Top Angle 
Is the angle of the steering arm (Pitman arm from the steering box or idler arm) when viewed from the top.  After entering the angle, click on the Top View button shown in Figure 2.46 to confirm the angle points in the direction you measured. 
Steering Arm Side Angle 
Is the angle of the steering arm (Pitman arm from the steering box or idler arm) when viewed from the side.  After entering the angle, click on the Side View button shown in Figure 2.46 to confirm the angle points in the direction you measured. 
Swivel Axis Front Angle 
Is the angle of the steering arm axis when viewed from the front.  After entering the angle, click on the Front View button shown in Figure 2.46 to confirm the angle points in the direction you measured. 
Swivel Axis Side Angle 
Is the angle of the steering arm axis when viewed from the side.  After entering the angle, click on the Side View button shown in Figure 2.46 to confirm the angle points in the direction you measured. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
2.9 New Suspension Menu: 
The New Suspension command is available by clicking on File at the top, left of the Main Screen, then selecting New.  You will then be presented with the screen shown in Figure 2.47. 
When starting a New Suspension, it is usually best to first Open a previous suspension which is similar to the New Suspension you will be measuring (similar Measurements, Suspension Type, Roll Bar and Similar Suspension Comments.)  This previous 
suspension will then be the 'pattern' or 'template' for the New Suspension and will save you from having to type in many specs to describe this New Suspension. This also ensures consistency between your suspensions and reduces the possibility of errors. 
If the current suspension is not a good 'pattern' for this new suspension, you can abort starting this new suspension by clicking on 'Cancel (don't start new suspension)' at the top of the New Suspension screen. Then click on 'File' at the top, left of the Main Screen and select one of the 'Open' options to open a past suspension to serve as a pattern. 
There are 4 categories of specs and data you can individually select to keep or blank out from the previous suspension: 
• 
Other Specs 

• 
Measurements 

• 
Steering System 

• 
Test Comments 


Checking any of these categories will copy the measurements and entries from the current “pattern” suspension to the new suspension. Unchecking any of these will blank out these measurements and entries in the new suspension. Uncheck all 4 and you will start with a completely blank suspension. 
If you want to check the Other Specs, or want to modify some Other Specs from the previous 
Figure 2.47 New Suspension Menu 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 2 Definitions 
suspension, click on the 'See Specs' buttons for Other Specs.  Click on Help in the Other Specs menu for more info on how to enter these specs. When you close out this menu, you are brought back to the New Suspension screen.  Be sure to check the check box at the left for all specs you want to use for your new suspension.  If Other Specs is not checked, they will be blanked out. Blank specs may cause problems when entering Suspension Data for the New Suspension.  Therefore, we recommend you keep Other Specs checked for most situations. 
Most all specs in these categories can also be changed once the suspension has started with no problems.  This includes specs which simply describe the suspension and do not affect any calculations or what is recorded, like Chassis Number, Customer, Comments, etc. 
Two (2) critical specs are listed separately at the top: 
1. 
File Name for New Suspension is the file name the program will create for saving the Suspension Data for the new suspension you are starting. The program fills in a default name of the current suspension name, but incrementing the last digit in the name by 1.  You can change this name to most anything you like.  The program will warn you if the name entered is not valid and show you what is wrong. 

2. 
Folder Name for New Suspension is the folder in the 3D-DATA folder where the suspension will be saved.  The program may not be using the name 'folder' for this spec, but whatever word you have assigned in the Preferences menu at the Main Screen. The folder name 'Examples' is reserved for Performance Trends example suspensions supplied with the program, and can NOT be used for your suspensions. 


When you are ready to start the new suspension, click on 'Start New Suspension' at the top of the screen.  If some critical spec has not been entered, the program may warn you and ask you for it at that time. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Chapter 3 Output 
The Suspension Analyzer provides several ways to view and output the data and results, including: 
• 
Reports of tabular data displayed on the screen 

• 
ASCII files for exporting results to other software packages 

• 
High resolution graphs 

• 
Printer output of reports or graphs 

• 
Suspension Libraries for recording suspension data for later use. 


All these topics will be covered in this chapter. Figure 3.1 shows how to reach all these various features. 
Check Appendix 6 and 7 for several new features for output introduced in v2.0 and 2.4, including the ability to email graphs and reports. 
Figure 3.1 Various Output Options from the Main Screen 
Click on File to display several options to Save test files, Open test files which were previously 
saved, or print information. Click on Graph to display several Graph Options and produce a high resolution graph. 
Click on Report to display several Report Options and produce a tabular report.  Once a report is displayed, it can be output as an ASCII file, or printed. 
Name of current Suspension File. 

Saving options to Save a suspension file are discussed in Section 3.5. 
Opening options to open a previously saved suspension file are discussed in Section 3.5. 
Print options let you print the contents of this Main Screen, which is a good summary of this current test. See Section 3.4. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


3.1 Reports 
Reports can be made of various Suspension characteristics as the suspension goes through various amounts and combinations of Dive, Roll and/or Steer.  This menu lets you select what characteristics (data) to report and the motion for the suspension to go through. 
Click on the Report menu command at the Main Screen to be presented with the Report Options Menu shown in Figure 3.2.  The inputs in this menu are described below. 
Output 
The Output section specs lets you select the type of data you want calculated, and for what side of the vehicle. 

Report Type 
In this current version, there is only 1 type of report: 
1. Pick Individual Items. 
If you selected the Pick Individual Items report type, click on the Data Types in the top, right section to select (or 'deselect' if it has already been selected) that Data Type for reporting. Data will be reported for up to the first 5 Data Types you have selected.  
Side 
Click on the down arrow button to select the side of the suspension for data to be calculated, Left, Right or Left and Right both. 
Settings 
In the Settings section, select the Primary Suspension Motion  to be applied using the top 4 specs.  Then enter the range of motion and increment size.  This motion will appear on left side of the reports, one row for each increment.  Note that the larger the range and smaller the Increment size, the longer it will take to construct the report, and the more rows in the report.   
In the Settings section you can also select the Secondary Suspension Motion  to be applied using the next 4 specs.  This will add new columns in the report for each Secondary Motion.  You can also select None for keeping the report more simple.  Again, enter the range of motion and increment size for this Secondary Motion.  
You can also select the setting for the Suspension Motions you decided not to use.  For example, if you chose Roll as the Primary Motion, and Dive as the Secondary Motion, then you can select Steer to be at some particular setting. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Primary Type 
Select the primary motion you want to see in the report: 
• 
Roll 

• 
Dive 

• 
Steer 


Starting From 
Type in the starting amount of Primary motion you selected (Roll, Dive or Steer) in the suspension for the report. 
Going To 
Type in the ending amount of Primary motion you selected (Roll, Dive or Steer) in the suspension for the report. 
Step Size 
Type in the increments size for the Primary motion you selected (Roll, Dive or Steer) in the suspension for the report.  For example, if you selected : 
Primary Type = Roll Starting From = 3 Going To = -2 Step Size = .5 
A report would be created for whatever data you selected at the following conditions: 
Roll, degrees = 3, 2.5, 2, 1.5, 1, .5, 0, -.5, -1, -1.5, -2 
Secondary Type 
Select the secondary motion you want to see in the report: 
• 
None 

• 
Roll 

• 
Dive 

• 
Steer 


If you select a Secondary Type other than None, then for each Primary motion setting, you would get each Secondary motion setting. 
Starting From Going To Step Size 
These are the same as for the Primary motion specs described above and are best explained with an example. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
If you selected: 
Primary Type = Roll Secondary Type = Dive Starting From = 3 Starting From = 1 Going To = -2 Going To = -1 Step Size = .5 Step Size = 1 
A report would be created for whatever data you selected at the following conditions: 
Roll, degrees = 3, 2.5, 2, 1.5, 1, .5, 0, -.5, -1, -1.5, -2 11 settings 
Then at each setting of Roll, 3 different Dive conditions would be set: 
 Dive, inches = 1, 0, -1      3 settings 
The total combinations for this report would then be: 
11  x  3  =  33 settings 
Hold At Hold At 
There are 3 types of motion you can apply to the suspension, Roll, Dive and Steer.  In the Primary and Secondary specs above, you can specify what 1 or 2 of these motions are and the settings for each.  But that leaves 1 or 2 motions unspecified.  These “Hold At” specs let you specify these 1 or 2 unspecified motions.   
For example, in the example above Dive and Roll are specified.  Then the 2nd Hold At spec will be disabled.  The first Hold At spec lets you specify the Steer setting. You could Hold Steer At 0 or straight ahead for the different Dive and Roll settings. You could also Hold Steer at some other setting, like 1” to the left and see what Dive and Roll produce with this steer setting. 
Table 3.1 Data Types for Reports 
Data Type  Definition (also see Section 2.1 for illustrations)  
Camber  Camber is the degrees of tilt of the wheel with respect to the ground as viewed from the front, in degrees. Negative (-) camber means the top of the wheel tilts in towards the car.  
Caster  Caster is calculated as the angle between vertical and a line connecting the two ball joints when viewed from the side, in degrees. It is about the same as King Pin Angle, except viewed from the side. Negative caster means the top ball joint is ahead of the lower ball joint.  
Caster Trail  Caster Trail is the distance between the center of the tire contact patch and where the Caster Angle line hits the ground.  Negative (-) Caster Trail means the tire is ahead of where the Caster Line hits the ground, and is usually produced from negative caster angles.  
Toe In, deg  Toe In is the angle of the wheel when viewed from the top, in degrees.  Positive Toe In means the front of the wheel is tilted in toward the center of the car.  
Toe In, inches  Toe In, inches is the distance the front of the wheel is tilted in toward the center of the car.  In the Preferences section, you can select to have this based on the tire circumference you've entered for this suspension (Lt/Rt), or some standard tire radius.  Selecting a standard tire radius lets you compare this number across any suspension, independent on the tires used for each.  
Ackrmn Error, deg  Ackerman Error is the difference in degrees between the "Toe In, degrees" and the "Ideal Ackerman, degrees" above.  

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


Tire Scrub  The change in Track width due to Dive or Roll motion.  This is listed as the change in Dynamic vs Static Track in the Suspension Data grid at the Main Screen.  
Roll Center Height  The Roll Center is an imaginary point at the intersection of imaginary lines connecting the tire contact patches and the Instant Centers. The car tends to roll about the Roll Center. Roll Center Height is the height of the Roll Center above ground.  If this is negative (-), it means the Roll Center is below ground.  
Roll Center Right or Left  The Roll Center is an imaginary point at the intersection of imaginary lines connecting the tire contact patches and the Instant Centers. The car tends to roll about the Roll Center. Roll Center Left and Right is the distance the Roll Center is left or right of the car's centerline.  
Anti-Dive, %  Anti Dive, % is the amount of resistance to dive from braking produced by the suspension geometry. Theoretically, a car with 100% anti-dive will not dive at all during deceleration.  


3.2 ASCII Data Files 

You may want to use the results from the Suspension Analyzer in other software packages. This could be for additional graph capabilities, statistical analysis, data basing, etc.  Once you have created a report (as shown in Section 3.1), click on File to write the results to an ASCII file with a name of your choosing.  The ASCII File command is possible any time a report is displayed on the screen. 
You can only save the results currently displayed on the Report screen. If you want to write an ASCII file of a suspension file you have previously run,  you must open that suspension file first, then create a report for that suspension file. 
ASCII File Options 
Comma Separated 
Select this option to insert commas between data points.  Leave this unchecked for data to be arranged in evenly spaced columns. 
Include Text 
Select this option to strip out all titles and letters, leaving only numbers. 
Convert to Columns 
If you do not select this option, data will be written to the file much like it is displayed in the report on the screen.  Select this option to have the report turned on its side, that is, the rows will become columns and the columns will become rows. 
File Name 
Enter a file name for saving this ASCII file. Checks are made to ensure what you enter is a valid file name and that you are not overwriting an existing file. The file is written to the Suspension Analyzer folder (directory), the folder which contains the SUSPANZR program file. 
Note to Advanced Users: You can also enter a complete path, including disk drive and folders.  As shown in Figure 3.4, you can write to d:\excel\latemodel.csv, which could be a location to analyze the data with a spreadsheet program. 
There are certain limitations for file names, as they can not contain certain characters, like /  \  :  |  >  <  *  ? “ . The program will warn you if you use an illegal character. 
See Section 3.5 for more details on file names. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


3.3 Graphs 
Graphs are obtained by clicking on the Graph menu command at the top of the Main Screen. Figure 3.5 shows a typical graph and a descriptions of some of the basic graph screen items.  (See Examples 4.2 and 4.3 for using graphs for analysis.) 
Appendix 9, v2.4C features now include a History Log which greatly expands graphing capabilities. 
Figure 3.5 Primary Graph Screen Items 
Command buttons. Some commands can only be done through these buttons, some of these buttons just provide a graphical button for performing action of some menu items. 
Menu bar provides for several graph commands and options. 
Graph Title 
Name of current Test File containing all suspension data and specs 

Graph Legend, which describes the data graphed. This includes Name of the Suspension file, Type of Data, which data goes with which file, etc. You can also click on Data Type names and the corresponding data line will flash. This is useful to find a particular line when several are graphed. 


Note that 2 Suspension File names are shown when you are doing graphs of 2 suspensions. 

Vertical Y axis. The scaling of this axis can be 
easily changed as described in this section. 
Horizontal X axis. The scaling of this axis can be easily 
changed as described in this section. 
Data graph lines. The style and thickness of these lines can 
be changed by clicking on Format, then Line Style. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Graph Options Menu 
The Graph Menu is shown in Figure 3.6.  Graphs can be made of various Suspension characteristics as the suspension goes through various amounts and combinations of Dive, Roll and/or Steer.  This menu lets you select what characteristics (data) to graph and the motion for the suspension to go through. 
Click on the Graph menu command at the Main Screen to be presented with the Graph Options Menu shown in Figure 3.6. The inputs in this menu are described below. 
Output 
The Output section specs lets you select the type of data you want calculated, and for what side of the vehicle. 
Graph Type 
In this current version, there are only 2 types of graphs: 
1. 
Pick Individual Items. 

2. 
Roll Center Motion 


If you selected the Pick Individual Items report type, click on the Data Types in the top, right section to select (or 'deselect' if it has already been selected) that Data Type for reporting. Data will be graphed for only the first Data Type you have selected.  
The Roll Center Motion graph is different than the others in that it graphs the 2 Data Types of Roll Center Height and Roll Center Left/Right versus each other. It is basically a picture of where the Roll Center is for various amounts of Dive, Roll and Steer.  See Figure 3.7. 
Side 

Click on the down arrow button to select the side of the suspension for data to be calculated, Left, Right or Left and Right both. 
Settings 
In the Settings section, select the Primary Suspension Motion  to be applied using the top 4 specs.  Then enter the range of motion and increment size.  This motion will appear on bottom, horizontal X axis on the graph.  Note that the larger the range and smaller the Increment size, the longer it will take to construct the graph, and the more detail in the graph.   
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
In the Settings section you can also select the Secondary Suspension Motion  to be applied using the next 4 specs.  This will add more graph lines to the graph for each Secondary Motion.  You can also select None for keeping the graph more simple.  Again, enter the range of motion and increment size for this Secondary Motion.  
You can also select the setting for the Suspension Motions you decided not to use.  For example, if you chose Roll as the Primary Motion, and Dive as the Secondary Motion, then you can select Steer to be at some particular setting. 
Primary Type 
Select the primary motion you want to see in the graph: 
• 
Roll 

• 
Dive 

• 
Steer 


Starting From 
Type in the starting amount of Primary motion you selected (Roll, Dive or Steer) in the suspension for the graph. 
Going To 
Type in the ending amount of Primary motion you selected (Roll, Dive or Steer) in the suspension for the graph. 
Step Size 
Type in the increments size for the Primary motion you selected (Roll, Dive or Steer) in the suspension for the graph.  For example, if you selected : 
Primary Type = Roll Starting From = 3 Going To = -2 Step Size = .5 
A graph would be created for whatever data you selected at the following conditions: 
Roll, degrees = 3, 2.5, 2, 1.5, 1, .5, 0, -.5, -1, -1.5, -2 
The bottom, horizontal X axis would start at -2 and extend to 3 on the right side. 
Secondary Type 
Select the secondary motion you want to see in the graph: 
• 
None 

• 
Roll 

• 
Dive 

• 
Steer 


If you select a Secondary Type other than None, then for each Primary motion setting, you would get each Secondary motion setting. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Starting From Going To Step Size 
These are the same as for the Primary motion specs described above and are best explained with an example. If you selected: 
Primary Type = Roll Secondary Type = Dive 
Starting From = 3 Starting From = 1 
Going To = -2 Going To = -1 
Step Size = .5 Step Size = 1 
A graph would be created for whatever data you selected at the following conditions: 
Roll, degrees = 3, 2.5, 2, 1.5, 1, .5, 0, -.5, -1, -1.5, -2 11 settings 
Then at each setting of Roll, 3 different Dive conditions would be set: 
Dive, inches = 1, 0, -1 3 settings creating 3 graph lines for         each side of the suspension you         chose to graph. 
If you chose to do Left and Right sides, the total combinations for this graph would then be: 
11 data points on 3 Right Side graph lines and 3 Left Side graph lines (6 graph lines total) 
Hold At Hold At 
There are 3 types of motion you can apply to the suspension, Roll, Dive and Steer.  In the Primary and Secondary specs above you can specify what 1 or 2 of these motions are and the settings for each.  But that leaves 1 or 2 motions unspecified.  These “Hold At” specs let you specify these 1 or 2 unspecified motions.   
For example, in the example above Dive and Roll are specified.  Then the 2nd Hold At spec will be disabled.  The first Hold At spec lets you specify the Steer setting. You could Hold Steer At 0 or straight ahead for the different Dive and Roll settings. You could also Hold Steer at some other setting, like 1” to the left and see what Dive and Roll produce with this steer setting. 
Table 3.2 Data Types for Graphs 
Data Type  Definition (also see Section 2.1 for illustrations)  
Camber  Camber is the degrees of tilt of the wheel with respect to the ground as viewed from the front, in degrees. Negative (-) camber means the top of the wheel tilts in towards the car.  
Caster  Caster is calculated as the angle between vertical and a line connecting the two ball joints when viewed from the side, in degrees. It is about the same as King Pin Angle, except viewed from the side. Negative caster means the top ball joint is ahead of the lower ball joint.  
Caster Trail  Caster Trail is the distance between the center of the tire contact patch and where the Caster Angle line hits the ground.  Negative (-) Caster Trail means the tire is ahead of where the Caster Line hits the ground, and is usually produced from negative caster angles.  
Toe In, deg  Toe In is the angle of the wheel when viewed from the top, in degrees.  Positive Toe In means the front of the wheel is tilted in toward the center of the car.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Toe In, inches  Toe In, inches is the distance the front of the wheel is tilted in toward the center of the car.  In the Preferences section, you can select to have this based on the tire circumference you've entered for this suspension (Lt/Rt), or some standard tire radius.  Selecting a standard tire radius lets you compare this number across any suspension, independent on the tires used for each.  
Ackrmn Error, deg  Ackerman Error is the difference in degrees between the "Toe In, degrees" and the "Ideal Ackerman, degrees" above.  
Tire Scrub  The change in Track width due to Dive or Roll motion.  This is listed as the change in Dynamic vs Static Track in the Suspension Data grid at the Main Screen.  
Roll Center Height  The Roll Center is an imaginary point at the intersection of imaginary lines connecting the tire contact patches and the Instant Centers. The car tends to roll about the Roll Center. Roll Center Height is the height of the Roll Center above ground.  If this is negative (-), it means the Roll Center is below ground.  
Roll Center Right or Left  The Roll Center is an imaginary point at the intersection of imaginary lines connecting the tire contact patches and the Instant Centers. The car tends to roll about the Roll Center. Roll Center Left and Right is the distance the Roll Center is left or right of the car's centerline.  
Anti-Dive, %  Anti Dive, % is the amount of resistance to dive from braking produced by the suspension geometry. Theoretically, a car with 100% anti-dive will not dive at all during deceleration.  

Graphs Comparing 2 Suspensions 
There are 3 basic types of suspensions which can be graphed in the Basic version: 
• 
Current suspension results. These are the suspension results of the suspension file which you are working with on the Main Screen. 

• 
Last suspension results graphed. These are the suspension results which you previously included in the graph for comparison.  This allows you a way to easily refer back to one particular suspension for comparison. 

• 
Add Suspension lets you pick any suspension from the Suspension Library to compare to the Current suspension results. This suspension now becomes the Last suspension results graphed. 


You can only compare 1 additional suspension to the Current Suspension.  If an additional suspension is graphed for comparison, the Add Suspension command changes to Remove Suspension. You must first click on Remove Suspension before the Add Suspension command reappears so you can add a different suspension. 
Other Graphing Features 
The graph screen has several other features, including: 
• Printing 
Figure 3.8 Graphing Multiple Tests 
Choose Add New Choose Add Last Suspension Suspension to open to add the last suspension you up the entire had added to the graph for Suspension Library comparison. (Suspension from which to choose Folder and File name are a New Suspension. shown for your info.) 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
• 
Cursor to pinpoint the value of a particular point on the graph 

• 
Changing titles and legend names 

• 
Changing the scales 


These are discussed in this next sections. 
Printing 
Figure 3.10 shows the options for printing graphs and how to access these options.  Figure 3.9 shows the screen for changing the Windows Printer Setup. Figure 3.11 shows how you can add information to a graph printout.  After you request printing but before the graph is actually printed, you will be asked 2 questions as shown in Figure 3.11. 
Figure 3.9 Standard Windows Printer Options 

The Properties (sometimes called “Advanced”) button displays a screen for selecting various printing and color options. Try changing these settings to correct certain print problems. 

Figure 3.10 Printing Graphs Clicking on the Printer button is the same as clicking on File and then Print Color. Click on File to display the 3 print menu options 
Click here to print the graph in color (solid lines). 
Click here to print the graph in black & white (various styles of dashed and solid lines). 
Click here change the printer or printer driver, page orientation, etc. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 



Cursor 
The cursor feature is very useful for determining or comparing the value of the graph lines at various places.  See Figure 3.20 for explaining the use of the cursor. Note that you only get readings at the actual data points.  For example, if you calculate Toe In every 1 inch of Dive (as shown in Figure 3.12), you will only get a reading at 1 inch increments of Dive.  You will get readings at 1” Dive and 1” Dive, but not at 1.46” Dive. 
Figure 3.12 Cursor Features and Commands 
Cursor line, usually pink or green, depending on 
Click here to turn cursor ON. 
background color. Click here to turn cursor OFF. 
Click on these buttons to move the cursor left or right. Hold down the <shift key> while clicking these buttons and the cursor moves faster. 

The value of each graph line at the cursor is displayed here. 
The X value of the cursor is shown here, in this case Dive = -1. 
You can also enable the cursor by single clicking on a graph line at a data point. This also provides a quick way to move the cursor from 1 area of the graph to another. (Do not drag the mouse while clicking or you will zoom in on that area.) 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Changing the scales 
Many times you may want to change the scale of the X or Y axis.  This may be to show an area in more detail or to match the scales of a previous graph. The program has several ways to change the scales as shown in Figures 3.13 and 3.14. 



The current scale limits are loaded when this menu opens. Change any or all these to most any value you want. 
Click on Turn Autoscaling ON to let the 
program pick the best scale settings. 
Click the Turn Autoscaling Off button to turn Autoscaling Off to enable changing specs in this menu. This screen shows this button disabled (you can’t change it), so Autoscaling is already turned Off. 
Click on OK to have the graph redrawn 
to these new scale limits. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Appendix 9, v2.4C features now include a History Log which greatly expands graphing capabilities. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.4 Printer Output 
The Suspension Analyzer can print the tabular suspension results of a report for a permanent hardcopy by clicking on Print in the menu bar or the Printer icon.  The menu of options shown in Figure 3.15 will appear.  Check the options you want to use for the printout by clicking on any or all of the Option boxes. All options and buttons are discussed in this section. 
Figure 3.15 Printer Button and Print Menu Command Options - Report Screen 
Click on Print or the Printer button (shown hidden here) for the Printout Options menu shown to the right. 
This options lets you choose the printer or printer driver being used by Windows and also page orientation. 
Check or uncheck these options, then click on this button to print the current report with these options. 


Suspension Results Report Options 
Include Suspension Measurements Include Other Specs 

Select these options if you want all the specs from these menus printed with the report.  This will add 1-2 pages to the printed report. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Include Suspension Comments 
Select this option if you want all the comments for the Suspension File printed with the results. 
Request Report Comment 
Select this option if you want to be asked for a comment for each particular report you send to the printer.  These "report comments" are useful to identify important points for future reference, like engine modifications, special suspension conditions, etc. 
Larger Font (Print Size) 
Check this option if your particular printer is printing the results with a small print font.  This option will increase the font size for some parts of some reports.  Also see Section 2.2, Preferences for Selecting Printer Fonts, page 24. 
Other Print Options 
Other menus have print menu commands or print buttons as shown in Figures 3.16 and 3.17. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
3.5 Suspension Libraries 
The Suspension Analyzer allows you to save Suspension Data to the Suspension File Library under a name of your choosing.  You can then open these suspension files out of the Suspension File Library in the future for comparison or modification.  The Open window is explained below with explanations. 
Figure 3.18 Suspension Library Options 
Click on File, then Open (from all saved suspensions) to display Suspension Library shown here. 
Click on File, then Save or Save As to save current  suspension and specs to the Library. Total # Suspensions in Library under this Folder 

Name of chosen Suspension (currently highlighted in List) Click and drag slide bar to view all Suspensions in list 
Preview of suspension chosen 
Single click on a Suspension to choose it for preview. Double click to immediately open it. 
Suspensions can be saved under various categories (folders) to help you organize large numbers of suspensions. Click on a different name here and a different list of Suspension Files will be displayed. The name “folder” can be changed in theClick here to Preferences menu todelete the chosen most any word.
Suspension. Click here to bring up
Click here to bring up “on screen” help. standard Windows File Open 
screen, to let you open a file
Click here to close the Suspension Library with No 
in most any folder (directory)changes (without opening a suspension) and disk drive. 
Click here to open the chosen Suspension 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Open a Suspension File 
To open a suspension file saved in the Suspension Library, click on File at the upper left corner of the Main Screen, then on the Open (from all saved suspensions). 
You will obtain the window shown on the previous page. Single click on one of the suspensions in the list, or click and drag the slide button on the right side of the list to display more suspensions.  Once you single click on a suspension, it is now the Chosen Suspension File and a preview of the suspension is given in the Preview section.  If the file you chose was not a valid Suspension Analyzer file (or alternate format read by Suspension Analyzer), the program will tell you and you can not choose it.   
Tip: Once you click on a suspension and get a preview, use the up and down arrow keys to go through the list suspension-by-suspension getting a preview of each suspension. 
The Suspension Analyzer can also read files from Performance Trends’ Roll Center Calculator and Circle Track Analyzer, and BTS Software’s Double Wishbone Suspension Analysis Software (tm).  Simply find these files using the Advanced feature, or copy these files to one of the folders under the 3D-DATA folder.  If you copy them to one of the folders under the 3D-DATA folder, you will be told of the file type when you click on them as shown in Figure 3.18.  The preview will only show this alternate file type name. 
Once a suspension has been chosen, you can delete it by clicking on the Delete button, or Open it by clicking on the Open button in this window. You can also click on a different suspension to Preview it or close this window and return to the Main Screen without choosing a new suspension file. 
If you are sure of the suspension you want to open, you can simply double click on it from the Suspension List.  This opens the suspension without a preview and closes this menu. 
Save a Suspension File 
Before you discuss saving a suspension file, it is important for you to understand how the program opens and uses suspension files. When you open a suspension from the Suspension Library, you are only using a copy of the suspension. The original suspension file is kept in the library.   
As you make changes to the suspension, they are only made to this copy.  The original file is not changed.  If you want to delete your changes, you can simply open a fresh, unchanged copy of the original suspension file from the Library.  If you want to keep your changes, you must save them. This can be done by clicking on File, then Save.  You are also asked if you want to save your changes whenever you open a new suspension, and the program has detected you have made changes to the current file. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


Figure 3.19 Saving Suspension File Options New name to save suspension data to. Leave unchanged and click OK to save to the current
Click on File Click here to suspension name. (This would be the same asthen Save As save specs clicking on File, then Save.) Click on the name into bring up to New the box to change it, then click OK to save it to thethis Save Suspension new name.
menu. name shown Name of current suspension file you are working with. 
Click on the down arrow button to pick a different folder to save this suspension to. Note that the top choice in this list is “Add New Folder”. Pick this option and then you can type in a new folder name, This new folder name will be added to the list so that you can save the suspension file to that folder if you wish. The word “folder” can be changed to most any word in the Preferences menu. 
Type in a New Folder Name here if you select “Add New Folder” as the Folder Name. 

Click here to bring up standard Windows File Save screen, to let you save a file in most any folder (directory) and disk drive, and to most any file name. Note that files saved this way are not found in the standard Test Library. 
To save a Suspension File, you will be presented with the Save screen as shown above.  The program suggests a new suspension name which is the same as the current suspension name shown at the top of the Main Screen.  If you want to save your changes to the same name, simply click on OK.  This will update the current suspension file with your latest changes. 
If you want to save the current set of suspension specs with your changes to a new name (and leave the current suspension file in the Library unchanged), then click on the suggested file name and modify it as you want.  For example, in the window shown above, you may want to add 2 to the current name CAMBERTEST to create CAMBERTEST2 to indicate this is the 2nd revision of CAMBERTEST.  This is the safest way to make changes, because you can always return to an earlier version and see what you had done. 
Because the Suspension Analyzer is a 32 bit program (not compatible with the older Windows 3.1), it can use most any type of file name.  The names can be up to 50 characters long and can include spaces, and upper case and lower case letters.  However, there are certain limitations for file names, as they can not contain certain characters, like /  \  :  |  >  <  *  ? “ . The program will warn you if you use an illegal character. 
Suspension files are saved to folders (directories) you have created in the 3D-DATA folder (directory) in the SUPSANZR folder (directory) under PERFTRNS.PTI folder (directory).  You can copy Suspension Analyzer files from programs on other 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
computers to this folder (directory) and they will be found by the program.  The Suspension Analyzer will read files produced with Performance Trends’ Roll Center Calculator and Circle Track Analyzer, and BTS Software’s Double Wishbone Suspension Analysis Software (tm).  Just copy them into a folder under the 3D-DATA folder (other than the Examples folder).  The Save to Floppy and Open From Floppy commands discussed on page 29 are an alternate, perhaps easier way to copy files from one computer to another. 
Advance Open or Save Screen 
If you click on the Advanced button in either the Open or Save As screen, you will obtain the screen shown in Figure 3.20.  From here you can access most and file on the computer on most any disk drive. 
Tips to Advanced Users: 
If you have a file from another computer, from another disk (like a floppy) or folder, you can simply copy it into any folder in the 3D-DATA folder and it will be found by the Suspension Analyzer program.  This can be done with a program like Windows Explorer (Windows 95.98). You can also create new folders (directories) in the 3D-DATA folder and these will also be used by the Suspension Analyzer program. 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 3 Output 
Chapter 4 Examples 
Each example in this chapter becomes progressively more complex, assuming you have performed and understand the preceding example.  Section 1.5's example is somewhat more basic than Example 4.1, so it may be a better place to start if Example 4.1 looks complicated.  
The results shown in these examples may be somewhat different than what you obtain with your particular version of the program That is due to minor upgrades in the calculations in later versions. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.1 Measuring Out a Typical Steering Box (Pitman Arm) Suspension 
Suggested Background Reading: 
• 
Section 1.5, Example to Get You Going 

• 
Section 2.1, Main Screen Inputs 

• 
Section 2.3 Other Specs 


This example demonstrates the basic steps to measure out the front end of a Pitman Arm steering suspension.  Pitman arm suspension is more complex than a Rack and Pinion steering and that is why it is chosen. 
Figure 4.1 Steps in Printing a Worksheet
Print a Worksheet 
You can print a worksheet which has blanks for recording all the required measurements.  It also makes a good check sheet to ensure you make all measurements. 
The worksheet will only show 
4) Save As lets
inputs required for particular 
you save any
suspension types.  For example, if 
changes you
you don’t say there is a Roll Bar, 
make to the
no Roll Bar mounting points will 
current file’s
be shown in the worksheet. 
Other Specs to a
Therefore, you should pick a 
new name, which
suspension file which is close to 
can be the name
the suspension to be measured to 
of the new
be the Current File.  See Figure 
Suspension File.
4.1. 
5) Print the
Then click on Other Specs to 
Worksheet.
ensure some critical specs here are set correctly. For example, if the current file has Rack and Pinion steering, there will be no blanks on the worksheet for the Pitman Arm steering measurements.  The Steering spec in the Other Specs menu  must be set to Steering Box. 
Critical ‘Other Specs’ to Set before printing Worksheet 
Steering   Susp. Travel Sensor Springs   Steering Sensor  Roll Bar 
Obviously it is important to set all specs correctly, its just that these specs listed above affect the worksheet bring printed right now. Any and all these specs can be changed at any time after you start creating this new Suspension File. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
After you have set the Other Specs to match your new suspension, you may want to save these changes (if there were any) to the name you want to use for the new suspension file you will create.  For example it could be called “Jim’s Busch Monte”.  To do this you would click on File, then Save As (step 4 in Figure 4.1). Then the program will ask you for a new name and folder for saving this new suspension file. See Figure 4.2. (DO NOT click on Save as that will save these changes to the current Suspension File, which you do not want to change. You only want to use the current Suspension File as a pattern for the new file and a pattern for the worksheet.) 
Now that the current file’s Other Specs critical specs matches the new suspension, click on File, then Print Blank Worksheet to obtain the worksheet shown in Figure 4.3. Note that the Print Report menu will flash for about a second or so before the worksheet is printed (see Figure 4.10 to see a worksheet). 
Make Measurements 
With the blank worksheet you are now ready to make measurements.  

Check pages 18-21 for some background on these measurements. 
Taking measurements can be a difficult and time consuming task if you try to be extremely accurate. You have got to keep in the back of your mind that the entire suspension is not perfectly rigid.  Bushings compress, arms and struts bend, tire sidewalls deflect. In most cases, accuracy within  0.1” (one tenth)  is usually sufficient. It is unrealistic to expect that you can measure things more accurately than this, however professional race teams with the best tools can do better. 
There are tools and fixtures available to help the measurement process * .  Most involve some type of surface plate with a grid laid out a 1” or 1/2 “ intervals, some type of height measurement calipers, plumb bobs, etc.  The method we will show here involves using an inexpensive piece of Sheetrock (drywall) as our grid plate.  Drywall works well since it stays relatively flat (use 1/2” thick drywall), is big enough for the entire front suspension and tires, and is easy to write on.   
1) Drive the front tires of the car on the drywall sheet which has been laid on a flat, level floor.  Be sure all measured points are 
within the edges of the sheet, the drywall has stayed flat, and the steering is straight ahead.  If you want to be extremely precise, you may want to put another equal thickness of drywall or other spacers under the rear tires as well to keep the car exactly level. Usually this is not required. 
2) Drop the plumb bob from the center of the wheel spindles extended out to the outside of the tire and mark this point on both the left and right side. A line joining these 2 points will be the axle line, the line from which all depth  
* See UniJig at 888-UNI-JIG7 or on the web at www.unijig.com, or contact Tri-Mark Performance at 608-356-3595 in Wisconsin, USA. 
Figure 4.3 Measuring Steering Box with Relatively Long Shaft (Steering Swivel Axis) Left Side Steering Swivel Axis Upper

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

measurements are made.  You do not have to draw this line yet, but only after all measurements are made.  See Figure 4.7. 
3) For all points in the worksheet, use the plumb bob to determine the location in the left/right and front back direction. Mark a dot on the drywall and label each point.  Then also measure the height to each point and write that down on the drywall also or on the worksheet.  Only height measurements are known at this time. 
4) One difficult measurement to understand and make concerns the idler arm and steering box.  What is required here is not so much some exact points, but the axis about which the idler arm shaft and steering arm shaft pivot. Any 2 points on this line are called Steering Swivel Axis points in the worksheet. For the steering box shown in Figure 4.3, the top and bottom of the steering box shaft can clearly be determined.  The length of the steering box shaft is also fairly long.  Therefore, you can use these points as the Upper and Lower points on the left side Steering Swivel Axis with good accuracy. 
For the right side idler arm, you can also 
Figure 4.6 Calculation Menu for Determining Upper and
clearly see the top and bottom of the idler 
Lower Points to Identify Steering Swivel Axis
arm shaft.  The problem comes from measuring these points accurately enough to determine the idler arm axis.  See Figure 4.4 If you assume you can only measure points accurate to 0.1 inch, then you need a large distance between the ends of the shaft to accurately determine the angle of the axis.  See Figure 4.5. This is a case where it is much more accurate to use the alternate measurement method described in Section 
2.8.5. This method involves measuring the angles of the idler arm (or steering box) shaft and length and angle of the idler arm or Pitman Arm. These angle and length measurements are all made referenced from the end of the arm that attaches to the center link. This also makes it easy to make these measurements at most any time in the future, even after the car has been moved.  You can print the Steering Swivel Axis screen of Figure 4.6 when it is blank and use it as a separate worksheet. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
5) Be sure to mark the center of the tire patch at both the front and back of each tire.  This is not for toe in determination, but for identifying the exact tire track from left to right.  See Figure 4.7. 
6) Make the other measurements required like Camber and Toe In.  You can also record other info like Tread Width and Tire Circumference. 
7) At the bottom of the Worksheet are several Other Specs you can measure or estimate.  Several of these we already set, like Steering type, Springs type, Roll  Bar type before we printed the worksheet.  The Height of CG and % Front Braking are very difficult to measure or determine accurately.  Luckily they are only used for the % Anti-Dive calculation.  It is recommended you estimate a Height of CG of 20” and % Front Braking of 65% as typical for most cars. 
8) When all measurements are done, roll the car off the drywall.  Draw a line from the left and right wheel spindle centers marked in step 2.  This will be the axle line. 
9) Draw a line from the front and back tire patch dots.  Where this line crosses the axle line is the center of the tire patch.   
Figure 4.7 Drive Car onto Sheet of 1/2” Drywall, Measure and Mark Critical Points 4 x 8 sheet of drywallFront of Car Mark point extended out from center of wheel Mark front and spindle on back of center of each side. tire patch to locate tire track width.  
Figure 4.8 Remove Car, and Draw Axle and Tire Track Lines, and Car Centerline                                                                   Distances toward front are Negative (-) depthsAxle Line is Car                       “Out” distances areconnects SpindleCenterlin                       measured fromcenter pointse is                       Centerline from each side of drawn the car perpen­dicular to Axle Line, Track Lines.centered Tire Track isbetween measured fromthe 2 these lines totrack the Centerline.li All Depth measurements are measured back from this Axle Line. Points ahead of this Axle Line areAll Out measurements are negative. For example, a Depth 3.5 inches aheadmeasured out from this Centerline. of theAxleLinehas aDepthof -3 5 inches  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
10) Find the middle of the tire patches and mark that point of the axle line.  Using a carpenters scale or some other method, mark a perpendicular line.  This will now be the centerline of the car. (Note that this centerline would not have to be exactly between the tire patches. The Edit feature in Section 2.4 would let you recenter these measurements with one command.) 
11) Now you can measure all the points from your marks on the drywall.  Depth measurements are made from the axle line.  Out measurements are made out from the centerline.  See Figures 4.8 and 4.9. 
Figure 4.9 Example of Measuring Some Particular Points                                                                         Depth ahead of                                                                        axle line are                                                                        negative (-)This point could be                                                       12.15 Outthe rear                                                                        -3.25 Depthframe mount for                                  7 3/4 Depththe left side                                     14 3/8 Outupper A Arm   Note that you can use fractions.  Simply  type in the fractions and the program  converts them to decimals.  This point could be the front frame mount for the right side upper A Arm. Note that depth measurements ahead of the axle must be entered as a negative number, with a minus sign in front of it.  
Figure 4.10 Portion of Worksheet Filled Out  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Entering Measurements into Program 
Now you have all the measurements on your worksheet.  Back at program, click on File (upper left corner of the Main Screen), then New (start new suspension) to bring up the New Suspension screen, which will likely show a Tip message.  See Figure 4.11. As the Tip in Figure 
4.11 says, it is usually easiest to start with a Suspension file that is as close as possible to the suspension you will create. This lets us avoid having to make major changes to suspension information like the Other Specs, Comments, etc. 
There are two 
Figure 4.11 The New Suspension Screen with Tip 

Click on File, then New (start new suspension ) to bring up the New Suspension Screen. 
Figure 4.12 New Suspension Screen
critical specs listed 
separately at the top.  See Fig 4.12. These must be filled out before you can start the new suspension. The program usually fills them in with default values based on the current suspension. 
1. File Name for New Suspension is the file name the program will create for saving the Test Data for the new suspension file you are starting. The program fills in a default name of the current suspension name, but incrementing the last digit in the name by 1.  You can change this name to most anything you like.  The program will warn you if the 
2 Critical specs for the new suspension are listed here at the top. Click here to start a New Suspension based on these settings. 




Click here to add a new folder name. 

A summary of the current settings of the Other Specs is given here. 

You can edit the current comments here for the new test, or un­check Test Comments to start with blank comments. 
Click on this button to see the current Other Specs settings. 
Click here to Check or Uncheck these options. Checking means you want to keep these specs for the new suspension. Once the new Suspension is started you can then make modifications to these specs if you want 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
name entered is not valid and show you what is wrong.  Earlier in this example we used the Save As command to save the current Suspension file to a new name JIM’S BUSCH MONTE.  This is the name shown here except the E in MONTE has been turned into a 1 You can click on the file name and change this 1 back to an E.  For this example the name used will be JIM'S BUSCH MONTE for this Busch suspension. 
2. Folder Name for New Suspension is the folder in the 3D-DATA folder where the suspension will be saved.  The program may not be using the name 'folder' for spec, but whatever word you have assigned in the Preferences menu.  The folder name 'Examples' is reserved for Performance Trends example suspensions supplied with the program, and can not be used for your tests. By clicking on the Add button, you could enter a new folder of BUSCH.  See Fig 4.12. This folder will be used for you will use for all of your suspensions used on the Busch cars. 
Since most all the measurements for this new suspension will be different than the current suspension (the one we printed the worksheet from), you will uncheck the Pick boxes in the New Suspension screen (except Other Specs).  This will produce a completely blank Main Screen for entering measurements as shown in Figure 4.13.  Based on the numbers recorded on the worksheet, start typing in your measurements.  When enough measurements have been entered, the suspension layout drawing will be constructed. 
Figure 4.13 Entering Measurements on Main Screen Data Grid 

are made to complete most of the layout.
Note that you can type in fractions. Type in the number followed by a space then the fraction and press <Enter>. The program will convert the number in this case to 24.375. 


Click on the “cell” of the grid where you want to enter a measurement. Type in the number and press the <enter> key to let the program know you are done typing and to move to the next cell. You can also use the up and down arrow keys to move to a different row. 
Click here to display the screen  Click and slide slide bar  
shown in Figure 4.6 to enter data  to move to other  
to define the points on the  sections of the  
Steering Swivel Axis.  Suspension Data grid.  


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 4.14 Main Screen After Entering All Measurements 

Save intermitently to save your work. Selecting Save instead of Save As saves the file to the current file name of Jim’s Busch Monte. 
The procedure shown here is just one of several methods to measure a suspension, enter the data into the program and save the data as a suspension file. 
Example 4.2 will show you how to analyze this suspension file. 
Conclusions 
• 
The program allows you to print blank worksheets for recording measurements. 

• 
These recorded measurements are entered into the program and the layout drawing is updated when enough measurements have been entered. 

• 
The program has several options for starting a New Suspension file and using some or none of the measurements, settings and comments from the previous (current) suspension file. 

• 
You should save you measurements periodically by clicking on File, then Save (to save to the same current Suspension Name) or Save As to save to a new Suspension Name. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.2 Analyzing a Suspension 
Suggested Background Reading: 
• 
Section 3.1 Reports 

• 
Section 3.3 Graphs 

• 
Example 4.1 Measuring a Suspension 


This example demonstrates the features to analyze a suspension once it has been measured.  It will use the WCSample file found in the Examples folder.  Click on File, then Open (from all saved suspensions) to bring up the Open screen.  Then click on Examples to select the 
Figure 4.15 Opening a Saved Suspension File
Folder in the lower left corner, then click on 
Click on File, then Open (from all saved suspensions) to display the Open screen. 
WCSample to highlight it and get a 

First select (click on)
preview. Then click 
the folder which 
on the Open button at 
contains the 
the lower left to open 
suspension file you
this Example file and 
want to use. 
return to the main screen. 
Second, select (click on) the file from this folder. A preview of this suspension is
Static 
shown in the Preview 
section to the right.
Analysis at 
Main Screen 
Finally, click on the
Back at the Main 
Open button to open 
Screen, there are 
this file and return to 
several useful 
the main screen. 
calculations to analyze this suspension. See Figure 4.16. Calculations like Roll Center Left/Right and Height, Caster, Anti-Dive %, etc. are calculated and shown in the Suspension Data table in the Output rows. You may have to click and slide the slide bar down to be able to see various sections of the Suspension Data table. If you click on the No View tab at the top (next to Front View, Side View, Top View tabs), you can display more of the table by eliminating the Suspension Layout drawing.  You can also click on File, then Print to print the entire table with all input and calculated output rows. 
The Suspension Layout drawing also shows several “gain” calculations.  Gain means increase in a calculated number for a standard amount of suspension movement.  The standard amount of suspension movement is set to 1 inch of dive when you first get the program, and is identified at the top of the Layout Drawing.  This standard suspension movement for calculating gains can be changed in the Preferences menu.  See Section 2.2. 
For example, the Left Camber Gain shown in Figure 4.16 of -1.27 degrees means the left camber decreases (goes more negative)  by 1.27 degrees with 1 inch of dive.  Negative Camber Gain is desirable in a race car suspension, so the tire camber goes more negative in corners, during dive and roll. See Appendix 2. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Bump Steer is a critical suspension characteristic.  Most racers and chassis builders want 0 bump steer, or do not want tire Toe In to change as the suspension goes through dive and roll. Toe In Gain gives you some idea of the amount of bump steer.  If Toe In gain is zero or very low, then bump steer will also be very low, at least through the standard suspension movement. 
Figure 4.16 Static Analysis at Main Screen Static conditions shown when “Dynamic” is not checked. 


Standard Suspension movement on which the gain calculations are based. 

Gain calculations and Roll Center are 
summarized here. 

Static calculated outputs shown in theseCalculated outputs are columns for Left and Right sides.


identified with “Output” 
in this column. Click and drag slide bar down to see different areas of the Suspension Data table. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Dynamic Analysis at Main Screen 
If you click on the Dynamic check box shown if Figure 4.17, you can now direct the suspension to move through various amounts of Dive, Roll and Steer.  You will now see the Dynamic values of many calculations, like Track, Camber, Caster, Ackerman, etc. in the Suspension Data grid.  For example, say you direct the suspension through the standard suspension movement on which the gain calculations are based (usually 1” Dive).  You should then see the change in Camber, Caster and Toe In from the Lt Change and Rt Change columns shown in the Figure 4.17 below, match the Suspension Layout drawing gain calculations. 
Figure 4.17 Dynamic Analysis at Main Screen 
columns for Left and Right sides. The change between Static and Dynamic are shown in the adjacent columns.. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Reports 
Reports can be made by clicking on Reports at the top of the Main Screen.  Reports are the dynamic calculated numbers for various combinations of Dive, Roll and Steer.  The Static calculated numbers will be included in the report if you include the combination of Dive = 0, Roll = 0 and Steer = 0, which usually happens.   
Click on Reports and you will obtain the Reports menu shown in Figure 
4.18. From this menu you will pick what calculated results to display at what combinations of Dive, Roll and Steer motion.  See Section 3.1 on Reports. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Graphs 
Graphs can be made by clicking on Graphs at the top of the Main Screen. Graphs are constructed much the same as reports, except that the results are graphed instead of being listed in a table. However, a significant advantage of graphs is you can compare 2 suspensions. 
Click on Graphs and you will obtain the Graphs menu shown in Figure 4.20. From this menu you will pick what calculated results to display at what combinations of Dive, Roll and Steer motion.  See Section 3.3 on Graphs. 
Click on the Make Graph button on Figure 4.20 to produce the graph of Figure 4.21. It shows Left and Right side Toe In for ­


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
3” to 3” Dive. If you click on Add Suspension, you can add a second suspension to the graph, as shown in Figure 4.22.  This suspension can either be the last suspension you added to a graph (or one done at Performance Trends if you just got the program), or you can pick some new suspension from the entire library of saved suspensions. 
Figure 4.22 shows the vertical Cursor which lets you pin-point values on the graph lines.  You can obtain the cursor by: 
• 
Clicking on a graph line near one of the data points which makes up the line (in this case near dives of -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2 or 3 inches). 

• 
Clicking on one of the cursor buttons. 

• 
Clicking on View, then Turn Cursor On. 


Figure 4.22 Graph Comparing 2 Suspensions 

Note that the current suspension settings are compared to some saved suspension file. If you want to make a comparison graph of a suspension with several different modifications, you must save each modification as a separate file.  For example, say you want to compare the original suspension file called WCSample to WCSample with the steering rack raised 1 inch.  If the current file is a copy of the WCSample with the 1” modification, then you would graph the current suspension (copy of WCSample with the rack raised 1”) and add the original WCSample.  Simple enough. 
But, if you want to graph WCSample with the rack raised 1” with WCSample with the rack dropped 1”, you have to save either of these suspensions with this modification at the main screen under some new name, like WCSample Raised 1.  Then you can modify the rack position to a 1” drop from the original position.  Make a graph of the current suspension (with a 1” drop).  You 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
now have the option of graphing this suspension with either the original rack position (WCSample) or with the rack raised 1” (WCSample Raised 1). 
Figure 4.23 is Graph 4.22 with the added Suspension File for comparison, and with the Secondary Type of suspension motion shown in Figure 4.19 set to Roll.  Each secondary suspension motion, in this case Roll at -2, -1, 0, 1 and 2 degrees, produces a separate graph line. You can see it can get quite confusing when you get so many different types of suspension motion graphed, especially for 2 different suspensions.  Usually you don’t want too many levels of Secondary motion, because it adds too many additional graph lines. 

Conclusions: 
• 
The Suspension Analyzer provides several methods to analyze suspension motion: 

• 
Staticly and Dynamically at the Main Screen. 

• 
Through the construction of reports 

• 
Through the construction of graphs and comparison graphs 

• 
Graphs provide the most flexible and powerful method of comparing 2 different suspensions. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Example 4.3 Adjusting and Optimizing a Suspension 
Suggested Background Reading: 
• 
Section 2.5 Adjust Feature 

• 
Section 2.6 Optimize Feature 

• 
Example 4.2 Analyzing a Suspension 

• 
Appendix 2 "Rules of Thumb" for Tuning Suspension Characteristics and Additional Reading 


The Suspension Analyzer provides several methods for making adjustments to the suspension easily.  Some will be demonstrated in this example.  For all examples, we will start with the WCSample used in Example 4.2. 
Shimming 
Assume you are circle track testing and determine from tire temperatures that the inside of the right front tire is getting too hot (working too hard). Since the car is always turning left, you want to try reducing static negative caster 1/2 degree to put more weight on the outside of the tire. On the car, camber adjustements are made by shimming the upper A Arm. You can do the same type of shim adjustments in the program.  Click on Adjust at the top of the Main Screen, then Shim Right Upper Arm In/Out. You will obtain the screen shown in Figure 4.24. 
Figure 4.24 Shimming Screen 
Note that this section says that removing shims moves the arm Out. If most cars you work with are 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Click on the amount of shims you want to add or remove from either the front or rear frame mount, and the change to Camber and Caster is displayed immediately, along with the current Camber and Caster settings.  When you have decided on the appropriate shim change, click on Use Calc Value to make these changes to the current suspension file at the main screen.  Note that not only will the frame mounts be changed, and Camber and Caster, but many other measurements as well because the changing Camber may also slightly change ride height on that side of the car. See the Adjust Feature in Section 2.5. 
Optimize 
The main reason you bought this program is to improve, or optimize, your suspension geometry.  One method of optimizing would involve you making many changes to mounting points, lengths of arms, location of the steering rack, etc., and look for some suspension characteristic to improve.  For example, you may want to shim the tie rod end at the spindle up or down to find a location which reduces bump steer. 
Note that some “Optimum” setting arrived at by this feature may not actually produce optimum handling or safety. It only means that some suspension characteristic falls into some mathematical range. The changes proposed by this feature to obtain improvement in one characteristic, may completely “screw up” other suspension characteristics, making the car unsafe to drive. If you accept some proposed change, you must check all other suspension characteristics to ensure safe vehicle handling. 
The Suspension Analyzer has the Optimize feature which directs the program to do this automatically.  You basically tell the program 3 things: 
1. 
What suspension points you want to adjust, how far and in what size steps. 

2. 
What type of motion to apply to the suspension, like dive, roll or both and how far and in what direction. 

3. 
What type of suspension performance characteristic you are looking for. 


Click on Optimize at the top of the Main Screen to produce the screen shown in Figure 4.25.  In this example we want to adjust (shim) the left and right upper arm pivots to find a roll center height which stays close to 3 inches as the suspension goes through +3 to - 3 inches of dive. The optimize menu only lets us do 1 side at a time, so we will have to optimize twice, first the left side and then the right side.  We have set up the optimize screen to allow 1 inch of adjustment up, down, left and right. Once the specs are set as shown in Figure 4.25, click on the Optimize button to start the process. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Select the range of adjustments, and in how fine a steps. 
Select the range of suspension motion to be checked, Dive and/or Roll. 
Select what outcome you 
want, or what suspension 
characteristic you want the 
program to try to obtain. 

When all combinations have been tried, the program will will summarize the results, and let you decide if you want to keep the proposed change. 
Note: The program automatically shims both the front and rear frame mounts the same amount for each condition, keeping caster fairly constant. 
When done, a message is given as shown in Figure 4.25, letting you decide to keep or reject the proposed change. 
After doing both the left and right side and keeping the proposed changes, we should check to see the effect. The easiest way would be to compare the original suspension (WCSample) with the new “optimized” suspension on a graph. Click on Graph at the top of the Main Screen, then select the special Graph Type at the upper left corner of the Graph Menu called Roll Center Motion.  Then select the suspension 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
motion range which was optimized for,  3 to -3 inches of Dive, with no Roll.  You will notice that all the data types are disabled on the left side because this special graph type dictates that the data graphed is Roll Center Height and Left/Right movement together. Click on the Make Graph button to make this graph type shown in Figure 4.27. 
At the Graph Screen, click on Add Graph and add the WCSample to compare the Roll Center movement graph to the original suspension. Figure 4.27 shows the new suspension does keep the Roll Center closer to a height of 3” than the original WCSample.  It also keeps it closer to the car’s centerline.  This may or may not be what you want.  Other graphs could show what has happened to Bump Steer, % Anti-Dive, and several other suspension characteristics.  That is why it is always good to double check all suspension changes the optimize feature has produced. 

Conclusions: 
• 
The Suspension Analyzer provides methods to adjust several suspension settings, much as you would do on the actual suspension. 

• 
The Suspension Analyzer provides ways to let the program automatically try several suspension modifications through various amounts of suspension motion to find some desired suspension characteristic. 

• 
The Roll Center Motion graph is a special graph type that lets you track RC Movement through some set amount of suspension motion. 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 1: Accuracy and Assumptions 
The Suspension Analyzer can do its calculations extremely accurately, based on the assumption that there is no compliance (compression or deformation) or clearance in any bushings, tires, joints or suspension members.  In reality, everything has compliance.  Therefore the Suspension Analyzer’s calculations will calculate results assuming aperfectly stiff suspension. 
A major limitation on accuracy will be your ability to accurately measure the exact center of different points, like ball joints and frame mount pivots.  See Section 2.1 and Example 4.1. 
A major advantage of the Suspension Analyzer over other simpler programs (like Performance Trends’ own Roll Center Calculator and Circle Track Analyzer) is the 3 dimensional inputs.  Doing all calculations in 3 dimensions greatly improves accuracy and will give different and improved results compared to 2 dimensional programs. 
Calculated motion ratios are based on the ratio of movement of the mount points to the movement of the wheel for some standard amount of vehicle movement, called Specs for Calculating Camber Gain. See Section 2.2, Preferences.  During this standard movement, the program also checks on how much the springs (and shocks and roll bar, if any) compress (twist in the case of the roll bar) for this standard movement.  Knowing how far the spring compresses for a given amount of wheel movement is the precise way the program calculates the spring (and shock and roll bar, if any) Motion Ratio. 
Note, however, that if the standard movement is very small, Motion Ratio accuracy will not be good.  For example, say the standard motion is 1/2" Dive and 2 deg Roll.  The left side wheel may go through a 1" of travel, but the right side may go only through .05" travel. The right side Motion Ratio will not be accurate.  Therefore, for accurate Motion Ratio calculations, we recommend you use the default standard motion of 1"  Dive (or at least avoid Roll as a standard motion). 
Many other software packages use much simpler calculations, with the assumptions the wheel moves just as much as the lower ball joint. This is often a wrong assumption, and is the reason the Suspension Analyzer’s motion ratio calculations will not match that of other programs. 
Please read Appendix 2 to see how that exact accuracy may not be that critical. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 2 "Rules of Thumb" for Tuning Suspension Characteristics and Additional Reading 
Suspensions can be set up for various types of handling: 
• 
Optimum performance, which usually means optimum cornering. 

• 
Stable, predictable handling on the street. 

• 
Anything in between. 


This appendix gives some very general guidelines.  The best information and understanding can be obtained by reading some of the books listed at the end of this Appendix 2. 
Version 2.0 introduces a new calculation called Front Lateral Load Distribution, or FLLD%. This can be used to understand vehicle balance (oversteer or understeer) and is discussed in more detail in Appendix 6. 
Optimum Handling (racing): 
Roll Center, Camber, Camber Gain 
Roll Center is an imaginary point about which the chassis tends to roll in cornering maneuvers.  In general the lower the Roll Center the more the car rolls in the corners, and the farther right the Roll Center the less the right side moves up or down during cornering. Camber Gain is the amount of camber change (tilt of the tires when viewed from the front) you get from a certain amount of body motion, typically 1 inch of dive from braking.  Most race cars want Camber Gain in the range of  -1 to -2 degrees for an inch of dive. This is especially true for the outside tire in a turn.  For circle track cars (always turning left), the desired camber gain on the left side may be less or even a positive number, depending on track banking and other factors. Both of these have a large impact on a car’s handling and maximum cornering capability. 
Note from Performance Trends: It is difficult to get any agreement from “experts” on optimum Roll Center location, Camber Gain, static Camber setting, etc.  This is true for most any suspension setting. The reason appears to be that these settings are so “combination dependent”. Traction capability of the track and tires; tire construction; roughness of track; temperatures; compliance of the chassis, suspension members and bushings, shock settings, etc. all come into play. However, the component with the biggest effect on optimum settings is the driver. Driver preference for how a car handles and “feels” to them has a huge effect on their confidence, aggressiveness on the track, and therefore lap times. 
The following statements are ones we have found in various references which appear to be consistent between these references. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Roll Center: 
Several authorities agree that the static Roll Center (before any Dive or Roll) should be from 2.5" to 4.5" above the ground.  For 
road race cars (turning both left and right) you want to keep the Roll Center near the car's centerline (left or right). The farther the Roll Center is to the Left, the quicker the car will react (more it will Roll) when going into a Left turn.  For this reason, many asphalt circle track (left turning) cars locate the Roll Center to the right of center (less Roll) and dirt cars locate the Roll Center to the Left of center (more Roll and hopefully better "bite" at the right front).  However, the car is more predictable "all around" if the Roll Center is kept close to the car's centerline. 
Higher circle track banking (20 degrees or more) usually requires a lower Roll Center, in the 2-3 inch range. The more mass in the front of the car (heavier engine or engine more forward), the higher the Roll Center should be. Some circle track authorities believe a lower Roll Center works better on dirt because the higher body roll produces more "side 
bite" from the tires. Lower Roll Centers require stiffer springs to control Roll.  However, stiff springs hurt traction on bumpy tracks.  The less the Roll Center moves during Dive and Roll, the more predictable the car's handling.   Most authorities agree that holding the Roll Center position as constant as practical during Dive and Roll is optimum. 
Camber/Camber Gain: 
For Circle Track cars (turning left), reasonable Static Camber values (before any Dive or Roll) are:  Left Side + 1 degree, Right Side -2 to -3 degrees. 
Wider and/or stiffer sidewall tires require less Static Camber. 
Camber Gain should be in the range of -1.75 for a flat track, -1.25 for a medium banked track (10-15 degrees) and down to -1 for highly banked tracks (over 25 degrees) on the outside tire (right tire in a left turn). For circle track cars (always turning left), the desired camber gain on the left side may be less or even a positive number, depending on track banking and other factors. These Camber Gains are based on the program's standard definition as the amount of Camber Change from 1" of Dive. 
Toe In, Toe In Gain (bump steer) 
“Toe In causes stability and initial understeer in a turn. Toe Out (negative toe in) causes instability and initial oversteer. Usually you want just enough toe in to keep the wheels from going into toe out at speed.”  How to Make Your Car Handle, Fred Puhn. 
Suspension tuners vary somewhat on what they prefer for Toe In. Some tuner’s personal preferences are for slight positive Toe In to slight negative Toe In (toe out), but most agree that minor changes can have a large effect.  For circle track racing, higher amounts of  negative Toe In (toe out) are used, up to 1/4” negative total Toe In (1/8 inch toe out at each wheel). 
Most race authorities agree that 0 Toe In Gain (no bump steer) is ideal.  Some tuners have different theories for Toe In Gain (bump steer) for circle track (left turning only) cars, but there seems to be no consistent agreement. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Caster 
You almost always want positive caster (top ball joint behind the lower ball joint).  Positive caster provides self-centering steering so the wheel returns to straight ahead automatically.  In most situations where cars turn both left and right, you want left and right caster the same.   
In circle track racing, right side caster is generally 1.5-2.5 degrees more than the left, with more caster being used with power steering and dirt racing. 
As another “rule of thumb”, generally the caster angle should be about 1/2 of the King Pin Axis (Inclination) Angle when viewed from the front.  See Figure 2.11, page 24. 
Caster Gain (Anti-Dive) 
Most suspensions have positive Caster Gain, which is also an indication of Anti-Dive being present in the suspension geometry. Anti-Dive means the suspension resists diving during the application of the brakes.  Race cars with lower center of gravity and stiffer springs usually don’t require as much Caster Gain (Anti-Dive) as production cars.  Negative Caster Gain means the car will dive more than normal during braking and generally should be avoided. 
Caster Trail 
Caster Trail is positive if the tire patch is behind the point where the caster angle hits the ground.  This is typical of most cars because most cars run positive caster.  Caster Trail can be changed by changing tire diameter, spindle or the caster angle. Caster is similar to Scrub Radius, except viewed from the side instead of the front.  Increasing Caster Trail will increase steering wheel effort, especially when cornering hard. 
Scrub Radius 
Most race cars have positive Scrub Radius, which provides feedback to the driver of when either tire is loosing traction.  Three to 5 inches is normal is circle track racing.  Unequal amounts a Scrub Radius left and right will cause the car to pull to one side under braking. Generally you want to keep the Scrub Radius equal, or at least with in 1/4 inch from side to side. 
Street Performance 
On the street, you usually want a suspension which is stable.  This means the car tracks true down the road and is not upset by minor changes in the road.  It also means that during extreme or emergency situations, the suspension is very forgiving.  This is generally what the auto makers do for production vehicles 
Fred Puhn’s “How to Make Your Car Handle” contains production specs for several cars.  These specs are rather dated, but give the suspension tuner and builder a good overview of typical production settings. 
Roll Center: 
Keep the roll center centered and fairly low, from 1” to 3" above the ground. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Camber/Camber Gain: 
Adjust camber to the manufacturer’s recommended specs if they are available.  If you have a custom suspension, keep camber close to 0 for daily driving.  You can go to -0.5 degrees camber for better extreme cornering, but you will increase tire wear. 
Camber Gain should be kept low, usually between 0 to -.5 degrees per inch of dive. 
Toe In, Toe In Gain (bump steer) 
Adjust Toe In to the manufacturer’s recommended specs if they are available.  If you have a custom suspension, start with Toe In at 1/8 inch total (1/16 inch toed in at each wheel).  Front wheel drive cars usually want slight negative Toe In. 
Production vehicle’s usually have a Toe Gain curve where high amounts of dive (2.5 to 3 inches dive) will produce about negative -3/4” total Toe In (3/8 inch toe out at each wheel). 
Caster 
Adjust caster to the manufacturer’s recommended specs if they are available.  If you have a custom suspension, start with positive caster. Light cars need more caster than heavier cars.  Start with +2 to +3 degrees on cars under 2800 lbs, and +1 to +2 degrees for cars over 2800 lbs. 
As another “rule of thumb”, generally the caster angle should be about 1/2 of the King Pin Axis (Inclination) Angle when viewed from the front.  See Figure 2.11, page 24. 
Caster Gain (Anti-Dive) 
Most suspensions have positive Caster Gain, which is also an indication of Anti-Dive being present in the suspension geometry. Anti-Dive means the suspension resists diving during the application of the brakes.  Production cars usually  use more Caster Gain (Anti-Dive) than race cars. Negative Caster Gain means the car will dive more than normal during braking and should be avoided. 
Caster Trail 
Caster Trail is positive if the tire patch is behind the point where the caster angle hits the ground.  This is typical of most cars because most cars run positive caster.  Caster Trail can be changed by changing tire diameter, spindle or the caster angle. Caster is similar to Scrub Radius, except viewed from the side instead of the front.  Increasing Caster Trail will increase steering wheel effort, especially when cornering hard. 
Scrub Radius 
Most production cars have a relatively low Scrub Radius compared to race cars.  You definitely want equal scrub radius on each side of the car. Negative Scrub Radius is more stable than positive Scrub Radius, especially when braking if the left and right braking forces are not equal. Unequal amounts a Scrub Radius left and right will cause the car to pull to one side under braking. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Additional References: 
How to Make Your Car Handle by Fred Puhn.   Classic Motorbooks  800-826-6600 Osceola, WI Chassis Engineering by Herb Adams.   Classic Motorbooks  800-826-6600 Osceola, WI Tune to Win by Carroll Smith, Classic Motorbooks  800-826-6600 Osceola, WI Building the Pro Stock Late Model Sportsman by Steve Smith.  Steve Smith Autosports  714-639-7681 Santa Ana, CA Stock Car Dirt Track Technology by Steve Smith.  Steve Smith Autosports  714-639-7681 Santa Ana, CA 
Fundamentals o f Vehicle Dynamics by Thomas D. Gillespie  Classic Motorbooks 800-826-6600 Osceola, WI Race Car Vehicle Dynamics by William F and Douglas Milliken  Classic Motorbooks  800-826-6600 Osceola, WI Tires, Suspension and Handling by John C. Dixon Classic Motorbooks  800-826-6600 Osceola, WI 
Richard Hathaway, suspension seminars,  Email:   richard.hathaway@wmich.edu  Kalamazoo MI Pi Research, suspension seminars,  317-259-8900 Indianapolis, IN 
Tri-Mark Performance, Fee for service “one-on-one” consulting and questions answered,  Email:  trimark@midplains.net or Fax questions to 608-355-9827 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 3 Backing Up Data 
Version 2.0 added 1 step backup and restore commands. Check Appendix 6 for details. 
Backing up data means to make more than one copy of the data which can be used or referred to at a later date.  This may be needed in the event one copy becomes lost or erased, or you need room in the Suspension Library.  Backing up data can take 2 basic forms, either Paper Reports, or Copying files with Windows copy commands 
Other than making Paper Reports, backing up data requires knowledge of Windows Explorer (95, 98, NT) commands.  Unless you are experienced with Windows commands, have someone experienced with Windows assist you to prevent losing data. 
Paper Reports: 
If you already keep written copies of all suspensions you measure, you already understand this form of backing up data.  You could continue to do this by simply clicking of File, the Print at the Main Screen to print a summary of each suspension.  The disadvantage of Paper Back Ups:  For example, say you have accidentally erased a Suspension File but have a paper report of that data. You will have to type in all this data by hand, which is time consuming and prone to errors. 
Copying data to disk with Windows commands: 
This method is the preferred method.  If you are not familiar with Windows commands, have someone help you the first couple of times.  However, this is the most reliable and most efficient way to back up your data.  
Note: Unless stated otherwise, all mouse clicks are with the normal, left button on the mouse. 
To copy Entire 3D-DATA Folder using Windows 95, 98 or NT, which contains all folders and suspension files in the Suspension Library: 
Click on Start, then Programs, then Windows Explorer (usually at the bottom of the list of programs).  You will obtain the Windows Explorer screen shown in Figure A4.2. 
Locate the PERFTRNS.PTI folder (may not be printed in capital letters) on the left side of the Windows Explorer screen, 
usually on the C drive.  Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the PERFTRNS.PTI folder. 
You should now see the SUSPANZR folder. Click on the [+] sign to the left of it to display the contents of the 
SUSPANZR folder. 
You should now see the 3D-DATA folder. Right click on the yellow 3D-DATA folder icon to display the menu of options.  Click on Copy to copy this entire folder (all suspension files in the standard Suspension File Library). 
Note: In v2.0, PERFTRNS.PTI is now the Performance Trends folder in the Program Files folder, and the SUSPANZR folder is now SuspAnzr20 folder. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A4.2 Copying Files with Windows 95, 98 or NT Windows Explorer 
Find the SuspAnzr folder under the PERFTRNS.PTI folder, usually on the C drive. Click on the [ +] box to the left of a folder to show its contents (folders). 

Click and drag the slide bar button to move up and down the list of folders. 
The contents of the open (clicked on) folder on the left is shown here, including both folders and files. 


Drag slide bar to the top of the list to find your Floppy disk drive (usually A) Right click (with the right mouse button) on the 3D­DATA folder (not seen here) to open a menu of options. 

Click on Copy to copy the entire contents of the 3D­DATA folder (the entire test file library). DO NOT click on Cut. 
Right click on the Floppy drive icon. 
Then click on Paste to paste whatever you copied (in this example, the entire 3D­DATA folder) to the disk in the Floppy drive. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Now you must tell the computer where you want to copy the files to.  Click and drag the slide bar for the left section of the Windows Explorer screen to the top. (You can also click on the up or down arrow buttons on the slide bar.)  Look for the Floppy Drive icon, usually the “A” drive.  Put a new, formatted disk in the floppy drive.  Then right click on the Floppy Drive icon, and select Paste from the list of options.  You will see the floppy drive light come on as the entire 3D-DATA folder and all its contents are copied to the floppy disk.  Label this disk with something like “3D-DATA folder, xx/xx/xx” with a name and date. 
Notes: 
If you have so many suspensions in the Suspension Library, they may not all fit onto 1 floppy disk.  Windows Explorer will tell you this and ask you to insert another new, formatted disk.  If this happens, be sure to label all disks with a name, date and sequential #s, and keep the entire disk set together. A suggestion for novice computer users is to make each folder under 3D­DATA a separate floppy disk. This may require more floppy disks, but will make it easier to understand restoring just certain folders in the future. 
You may just want to back up one particular folder in the suspension library (in the 3D-DATA folder) or just 1 particular suspension. You would do this the same as with copying the entire 3D-DATA folder, just click on the [+] by the 3D-DATA folder to display the folders under 3D-DATA.  Then right click on the folder you want to Copy.  To find individual suspension files, click on the yellow folder icon containing the suspension file and the contents of the folder will be shown on the right side of the Windows Explorer screen. Then right click on the suspension file name and select Copy. 
You can also copy individual suspension files to the floppy drive inside the Suspension Analyzer program.  Open the file you want to copy so it is the current suspension file.  Then click on File at the top of the Main Screen, then select Copy to Floppy Disk. This command takes care of all 3 files mentioned in the previous paragraph automatically. 
More experienced computer users may want to use the “Backup” features built into Windows 95 and 98 (click on Start, Programs, Accessories, System Tools, Backup).  This compresses suspension files so it takes fewer floppy disks.  However you need to use the Backup program to restore suspension files, which can be more confusing to novice computer users. 
Restoring Data 
Be very careful when restoring data, as you may overwrite Suspension Files with old, erroneous information. Read all the information below before restoring data.  If you are not familiar with Windows Explorer, have someone more experienced help you. 
The ONLY reason to restore data is if you have lost suspension files. This could be because you mistakenly erased it,  you had a major computer failure, or you are moving the program to another computer.  Do NOT restore data unless you have one of these problems, as you could possible create many more problems than you are trying to fix. 
When restoring suspension files and folders, you pretty much reverse the procedure for backing up.  First you  put your backed up floppy disk in the floppy drive.  Then open Windows Explorer, find the Floppy drive icon and click on it to display its contents. Right click on the folder you want to restore and select Copy. 
Now find the 3D-DATA folder under SUSPANZR under PERFTRNS.PTI, usually on the C: drive.  Right click on the folder 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
1 level up from the folder you are restoring.  For example, if you are restoring the suspension file folder CHEV which was in the 3D-DATA folder, you must click on the 3D-DATA folder. If you are restoring the entire Suspension Library folder 3D­DATA, you must click on the 3D-DATA folder. If you are restoring the suspension file 194-150 which was in the CHEV folder under the 3D-DATA folder, you must click on the CHEV folder. 
During the restoring (copying) process, Windows Explorer checks to see if it is overwriting an existing file (Figure A4.3).  If it is, it will ask you if the existing file or folder should be overwritten.  Be very careful when overwriting files, as you may overwrite a new suspension file with data from an old suspension file of the same name.   
Before restoring suspension files, it is good practice to back up all suspension files first.  Then if you make a mistake, and overwrite suspension files you didn’t mean to, you have your backup copies to restore the suspension files from. 
Note: In v2.0, PERFTRNS.PTI is now the Performance Trends folder in the Program Files folder, and the SUSPANZR folder is now SuspAnzr20 folder. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 4 Full Vehicle Version: Overview of Features 
The Full Vehicle version of Suspension Analyzer has several enhancements over the standard version, the most significant is analyzing various types of rear suspensions and combining front and rear suspensions together for full vehicle analysis.  A list of the Full Vehicle version’s features includes: 
The Full Vehicle Version lets you graph or report these additional types of data. 
Anti-Squat % (see App. 5)  Sprng Ang, Frt  Sprng Ang, Side  
   Sprng Mtn Ratio     Shock Mtn Ratio     RollBar Mtn Rto  
   Sensor Mtn Rato  Front Swing Arm  Side Swing Arm 
 Axle Side Angle     Rear Axle Lead     Binding Error  

These data types are added to the bottom of the Data List in the Graph and Report menu.  
Figure 1 

These data are displayed on the Main Screen in the Data Grid.  For a complete listing of these inputs and calculated outputs, click on Help at the top of the Main Screen, then List Definitions for Main Screen Input/Output. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The Full Vehicle Version lets you specify Push Rod w Rocker Arm and Pull Rod w Rocker Arm springs for Double A Arm suspensions. In Vehicle Specs, choose these types for the “Springs” spec. 

Full Vehicle Version lets you analyze these ends of the car. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
To graph or report data for a particular end of the car, you must have chosen to view that end of the car on the main screen by clicking on the appropriate button at the lower right of the layout screen. 
The Rear Suspension Types supported at this time include are given below. 
Double A Arm    McPhearson Strut  
Three Link w panhard bar     Four Link (angled links like Chevelle or 5.0L Mustang)  
Four Link w panhard bar    Ladder Bars (trailing arms)  
   NASCAR Truck Arms    C3 Corvette (63-82) coming soon   


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
If you analyze Front and Rear Suspension together, the program also calculates and displays these Full Vehicle results.  These results are listed at the bottom of the Data Table on the main screen. 
   Total Roll Stiffness, ft-lbs/deg     Front Roll Couple, %  
   Rear Roll Couple, %     Roll Axis to CG Moment Arm 
   Level Ground Roll Rate, deg/G  Front Natural Freq, cps  
Rear Natural Freq, cps  

The Depth (Z) measurements for Rear Suspensions are positive if they are in front of the axle, toward the front of the car.  Depth 
(Z) for both the front and rear mean “in towards the center of the car”.  See Figure 5 if you’ve made a mistake entering Z measurements. 
Figure 5 

Another useful feature for working with front and/or rear suspensions is the ability to “selectively open” one end of a vehicle suspension file and use it on the same end of the current vehicle you are working with or building.  For example, say you have built a vehicle file working with only the Front Suspension file.  Now you want to put only that front suspension on an existing vehicle file which has both a front and rear, but you want to keep the rear.  You would click on File, then Open, then choose the Selective Open option shown in Figure 6. This feature also lets you put a front suspension on the rear or rear suspension on the front (McPhearson Strut or Double A Arm only). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples (C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Version 1.1 C.017, Feb 4, 2002 added a new type of rear suspension type, the IRS with lower H arm, typical of that used in the IRS Ford Thunderbirds in 1987 and the Cobra Mustangs.  See Figures 7 and 8 below. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 5 Illustrations of Calculations 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 6 New Features in v2.0 
Version 2.0 was released in 2006 and added the following major features: 
• 
A new Preference of Metric inputs was added.  Inputs are entered in Centimeters, KG for weight, and Kg/Cm for spring rate.  The program keeps track of what units are used for each suspension file.  If you are in, say, Metric mode and open a file saved with English units, the units will be converted to metric once it is opened.  You can also manually force a file to be converted by clicking on Edit (top of main screen) then selecting either Convert Measurements to Metric or Convert Measurements to English.  See Fig A 6.1. 

• 
Added a new calculation called Front Lateral Load Distribution, or FLLD% and Rear Lateral Load Distribution, or RLLD%.  These calculations are similar to “roll couple” and can be used to find a “balanced” setup by adjusting spring and roll bar rates, and roll center heights. This feature is only in the Full Vehicle version and is discussed in detail below.  See Fig A 6.2 and A 6.3. 

• 
Several new “Optimize” features and options have been added, including one to find your desired FLLD% automatically.  This is discussed in detail below. See Fig A 6.3 and A 6.4. 

• 
A Watts Linkage has been added to the possible “Lateral Locator” devices, in addition to the Panhard bar.  This feature is only in the Full Vehicle version and is discussed in detail below.  See Fig A 6.5. 

• 
A solid axle with leaf springs is now a possible Rear Suspension type.  This feature is only in the Full Vehicle version and is discussed in detail below. See Fig A 6.6 and Fig A 6.9. 

• 
A coil over spring can now be mounted on the upper A arm, similar to that used in the early Ford Mustangs.  This feature is only in the Full Vehicle version.  See Fig A 6.9. 

• 
A coil over spring can now be mounted inboard of the frame attachment point on the upper A arm.  This is sometimes called a “rocker arm” spring and is common on Formula cars with independent rear suspensions.  This feature is only in the Full Vehicle version. See Fig A 6.9. 

• 
A Torsion Bar spring can be used with either a Double A Arm or McPherson Strut suspension.   This feature is only in the Full Vehicle version. See Fig A 6.9. 

• 
The program now has Backup/Restore commands.  Click on File at top of main screen and select either Backup or Restore.  The Restore command has 2 options, either restore all files from a previous backup or just 1 file at a time.  See Fig A 6.7. 

• 
When Opening a file, a “Find” button has been added, letting you enter some phrase or sequence of characters to look for in a particular files name.  This helps you locate files faster. 

• 
You can now import dimensions directly to the program from either a file or by pasting them after copying them from another program, like Microsoft Excel.  This feature is only in the Full Vehicle w Data Logger Option version and is discussed below. See Fig A 6.13. 

• 
The program can now read “freeform” ASCII files of data logger data.  We’ve tried to make the Suspension Analyzer “smart” enough to be able to recognize data from various data loggers, like Motec, Pi and AIM.  In addition, you no longer have to provide track map data, as the Suspension Analyzer can generate this info itself from distance, velocity and lateral Gs data. This feature is only in the Full Vehicle w Data Logger Option version and is discussed below.  See Fig A 6.12. 

• 
A new Preference lets you select to either have Toe Gain, Caster Gain and Camber Gain be displayed in the suspension layout drawing, or more simply Toe, Caster and Camber.  The “Gains” are the amount of change in these parameters for a given amount of suspension movement.  See Fig A 6.1 and A 6.8. 

• 
New Preference for choosing to have the Rear Suspension either to be “Draw Centered Between Tires” or “Centered on x = 0 Dimension”.  See Fig A 6.1. 

• 
Program now remembers the printer orientation (portrait/landscape) you’re using and restores it when you restart. 

• 
The program now draws the transmission angle (in front of the driveshaft).  You may not see this unless you use the Zoom options to slide the side of the rear suspension to one side.  See Fig A 6.6. 

• 
The locking algorithm now uses a computer hardware number which is more stable.  This means that you will be less likely to get a new unlocking code when you make changes to your computer. 

• 
Version 2.0 will look for and allow automatic or manual importing of all your v1.1 files.  See Fig A 6.7. 

• 
A new Preference was added to let you choose to display the Spring Angle (front and side view) or shock and sensor length.  See Fig A 6.1. 

• 
Several new example Suspension Files have been added. 


Also, click on Help, then Display Readem.doc file to display a more detailed list of each item which has been change or added, and any “bug” fixes. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Metric 

FLLD (Front Lateral Load Distribution) 
When a car makes a turn, weight is transferred from the inside tires to the outside tires.  However, how this weight transfer is split between the front and rear has a huge impact on the feel and handling of the car.  If more weight transfer occurs on the front of the car, the outside front tire is being “overworked” more than the rear outside tire, causing less cornering traction at the front. This is more likely to produce understeer or a push.  Very simplistically, if the Front Lateral Load Distribution is 50%, that means the weight transfer split between front and rear is the same, and that should produce neutral handling.  The book “Race Car Vehicle Dynamics” by Milliken and Milliken (with assistance by Terry Satchell) discusses this concept in detail.  This concept is similar to the idea of balancing the front and rear roll angles presented in recent magazine articles. 
Figure A 6.2 shows the program displaying the FLLD for the current vehicle (currently 44%, which would tend to have Moderate Oversteer) during the transition between releasing the brakes and going to the throttle, at the apex of the turn (transistion between braking and power). During braking and under acceleration, the weight transfer is much more complicated, and the FLLD concept can not be as easily applied. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Figure A6.3 is displayed if you click on the “Find” button shown in Figure A6.2.  This “Find FLLD” screen lets you find a certain Front Lateral Load Distribution (FLLD), which can be a good indication of how the car will handle at the apex or transistion of the turn (no power, no braking). 

Pick the 'Adjust' factor to tell the program what vehicle component(s) you want to adjust.  Enter your desired 'For This FLLD', then click on the 'Find Now' button.  For perfect theoretical 'Balance', the FLLD should be 50%.  However, from experience, Milliken suggests a target 'starting point' FLLD value of 5 percentage points higher than the percent weight on the front tires (100% - Rear Wt % = Front Wt %).  By default, the program will load in this value, but you can change it to anything else you want.  Higher FLLDs tend to make the car tighter, with more understeer. Lower FLLDs tend to make the car looser, with more oversteer. 
There are several ways to obtain a certain Front Lateral Load Distrbution percentage. To reduce the possibility of using very strange settings, the program will calculate the average front and rear natural frequencies for the springs. If these frequencies are significantly different than those typically used, the program will warn you.  Typically, the front natural frequency will be in the range of 1.4 to 2.0 and the rear will be .1 to .5 points lower than the front. 
For many vehicle combinations, the program can not find settings to match your requirements.  Many times this is due to the Front or especially the Rear roll centers being too high.  High roll centers transfer more weight laterally through the suspension linkages and less through the springs, making the springs and roll bar have less effect 
you adjust the Rear Roll Center and keep this change (click on OK/Keep), then you can go back into this screen and try adjusting springs and/or roll bar and they are likely to have more affect. 
The new settings you find using this feature MAY NOT BE THE BEST AND COULD BE UNSAFE.  USE YOUR JUDGEMENT when making adjustments based on this concept. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
New Optimize Features 
Figure A 6.4 shows some of the new features in the Optimize screen. 

To Obtain This Result… 
Choose what result you want to obtain, like to maintain a certain Roll Center Location (Left or Right) or Roll Center Height, Bump Steer (which is Toe In/Out), or Camber.  If Roll Center Height or L/R are not mentioned, then you are asking both to be kept stable (maintained). 
Some options let you try to match a 'Specified' Roll Center Vertical or Horizontal location. If you select this option, then the Vertical and Horizontal data entry boxes become enabled for you to enter values. Note: To specify a Horizontal Location LEFT of center, enter a negative (-) number.  Roll Center Height typically has a larger impact on handling than location Left or Right, so some of these options let you concentrate, say, 4 times more on maintaining height constant than horizontal motion.  This means that a 1 inch change in height will be considered as important as a 4 inch horizontal change. 
See Section 2.6, page 47 in this manual for more explanation of this Optimize Screen. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Watts Link Lateral Locator 
V2.0 lets you select a Watts Link (with the center pivot mounted to the axle) or a Panhard Bar as the lateral locating device for solid axle suspensions. Figure A 6.5 shows some major options with this feature. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Leaf Springs, Zoom Features and Transmission Angle 
Figure A 6.6 shows some additional new features in v2.0.  Notes for leaf springs: 
• 
Only the Height Measurement is needed for the Spring Mount on the Axle.  The program will assume this is on a straight line between the front and rear mounting points. 

• 
For the Rear Mount, use the location where the shackle mounts to the frame, not where the shackle mounts to the leaf spring. The program will assume approximately a 2” shackle that is vertical at ride height.  The rear end of the spring is not as critical as exactly where the shackle mounts to the frame. 

• 
Because leaf springs are flat, they resist roll more that coil springs do at equal spacing.  Most authorities say they have about 25% higher roll stiffness than the same suspension with coil springs or torsion bars.  Figure A 6.1 shows where you can change this percentage based on your own experience. 



(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
New File Options 
Figure A 6.7 shows some new File options.  The Backup command copies all suspension files to a floppy disk, CD or memory stick.  Restore copies files from a previously backed up floppy disk, CD or memory stick back to your program.  To be safe, before you restore, you may want to do a backup in case you restore “over the top of a file” which you have recently changed. 
The Import Dimensions from File is only available in the Full Vehicle Version with Data Logger Features. 

Preference to Show Toe Gain, Caster Gain and Camber Gain vs Actual Toe, Caster and Camber 
Figure A 6.8 shows the difference for setting this preference, as shown in Figure A 6.2.  Gains mean the amount of change for a given amount of vehicle movement, typically 1” of dive (or squat in the rear).  Setting this to Actual Toe, Caster and Camber may be easier to understand for many users. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
New Types of Springs 
Figure A 6.9 shows some of the new types of springs possible in v2.0, the Full Vehicle Version. In addition, Leaf Spring solid axle is an option as shown in Figure A 6.7. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Full Vehicle Version with Data Logger Option 
Animate Data Logger Data 
The Suspension Analyzer can read ASCII files from data loggers recording engine RPM, vehicle speed, shock travel, etc and display the actual suspension movement for detailed analysis.  This is done automatically with Performance Trends’ DataMite II data logger, but can also be done with ASCII data from other data loggers.  Figure A 6.11 shows the Animation screen when displaying this data logger data.   
To start the Animation process, click on Animate at the top of the main screen.  If you have purchased the Full Vehicle with Data Logger Options version, you will have a section called “Read from File” at the bottom of this screen.  Figure A 6.10 explains some of these features.  (See section 2.7 on page 49 for more basic explanation of the Animate feature.) 

There are 4 types of file formats the Suspension Analyzer can read, which can be picked in the Data Source input in the Animate screen, as described in Table A 6.1 below. 
Table A 6.1 File Formats for Animate 
Read from File (short)  This file would typically be for just the front suspension with minimal data channels recorded. Column 1 time Column 2 RF Shock Travel Column 3 LF Shock Travel Column 4 Steering Travel  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Read from File (long)  This file would typically be for both the front suspension and rear suspension with minimal data channels recorded. Column 1 time Column 2 Engine RPM Column 3 distance along track from starting location Column 4 RF Shock Travel Column 5 LF Shock Travel Column 6 Steering Travel Column 7 RR Travel Column 8 LR Travel  
Read from File w Track Map  This file is the same as what the Performance Trends DataMite II’s software would export to the Suspension Analyzer.  Most other data logger software packages do not export the Track Map feet data, so this form has been made easier to use with the addition of the Freeform format below. Column 1 time Column 2 track map feet to right (X direction) of starting location Column 3 track map feet forward (Y direction) of starting location Column 4 longitudinal gs, + is acceleration Column 5 lateral gs, + is accel to right (turning right) Column 6 distance along track from starting location Column 7 Engine RPM Column 8 MPH Column 9 RF Shock Travel Column 10 LF Shock Travel Column 11 Steering Travel Column 12 RR Travel Column 13 LR Travel Column 14 Brake pressure or Travel Column 15 Throttle Travel  
Read ‘Freeform’ File  This file format can have the columns in any order and does NOT need the Track Map data. The Suspension Analyzer can generate it from the other data supplied. You do not need to provide all data columns. The program will just not display what you have not provided. This format was designed so that you could just export or write most any ASCII text file from your data logger of all your channels, and the Suspension Analyzer would just “handle it”.  If you have a data file which the program can not “handle”, please email us a copy of it and we’ll let you know what can be done. time longitudinal gs, + is acceleration lateral gs, + is accel to right (turning right) distance along track from starting location Engine RPM MPH RF Shock Travel LF Shock Travel Steering Travel RR Travel LR Travel Brake pressure or Travel Throttle Travel  

Notes for the Freeform file format: 
• 
The data must be for only 1 lap. 

• 
If the data file includes data at more than 1 sample every 0.1 seconds, the program will ignore points which were recorded faster than 0.1 seconds, and only use points at approximately every 0.1 seconds. 

• 
The columns must each have a text name so the program can determine what they are.   

• 
Columns can be separated either by commas or tabs.   


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Example files of each of these file formats can be found in the Data Logger Files folder in the Suspension Analyzer folder “SuspAnzr20”. 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The 5 sections at the bottom of the graph consist of, from right to left, as identified in Table A 6.2. 
Table A 6.2 Graph Track Map Sections 
1  Track Map  The Track Map is a simplified drawing of the track layout.  If you click on a point on the map, then the circular “cursor” identifying that point is drawn on the map.  At the same time, a corresponding “cursor” is drawn on the Friction Circle for the same point, and the suspension movement for that position is displayed.  
2  Friction Circle  The Friction Circle is a graph of the sum of the lateral and longitudinal acceleration the vehicle is exhibiting. If you click on a point on the friction circle, then the circular “cursor” identifying that point is drawn on the friction circle.  At the same time, a corresponding “cursor” is drawn on the Track Map for the same point, and the suspension movement for that position is displayed.  
3  Steering, Throttle, Brake  This section shows the relative brake, throttle and steering wheel position and motion. These signals are what ever you have assigned as “Brake”, “Throttle” and “Steering” in the DataMite specs. If the steering wheel’s motion seems to be opposite of what the actual motion is, then click on the Options button and you can change it. See the explanation below. The term “relative” is used because before this section is drawn, the program finds both the maximum and minimum values for the brake, throttle and steering channels. Then the program “auto-scales” these 2 bar graphs and the steering wheel motion to show good resolution of this movement.  
4  Shock Movement  This section shows the relative position and motion of the shock sensors.  These signals are what ever you have assigned as “RF Shock”, “LF Shock”, “RR Shock”  and “LR Shock” in the DataMite specs. The assumption for this display is that as the Shock Signal gets larger, that the shock is extending (getting longer). The Red line connects the 2 rear shocks. This is a rear view of the car and this line is drawn with a longer line to simulate it is closer to the viewer.  The 2 front shocks are connected with a shorter, blue line. This section is good to visualizing general trends, but much more detailed results are available with the other Animate features.  
5  Engine RPM, MPH  This section shows relative engine RPM on the Tach Gauge and relative vehicle speed on the bar graph.  

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

Import Dimensions 
Some users use CAD programs for designing their suspensions, and needed an easy way to input several measurements quickly to the Suspension Analyzer program.  Figure A 6.2 shows the command to import these dimensions from an ASCII file.  Figure A 6.13 below shows how to do this by copying the data from a program (like Excel using the Ctrl-C command).  Then you will paste it into the Suspension Analyzer’s Import Dimensions screen by clicking on the Import window, then using the Ctrl-V command (press and release the letter V key while holding down the Ctrl key). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

The Suspension Analyzer can read suspension measurements copied from other programs, either tab separated or comma separated. The format is one row of 6 measurements for every row available for data entry on the current screen, either front or rear suspension. The data in the row is expected to be Left Side X, Y and Z, then Right Side X, Y, Z.   
Notes: 
• 
If your Preference settings are such that you are using a Front view in your Suspension Layout, the screen will display the Right side measurements in the left columns, then the Left side measurements. Even in this situation, you still have the Left side measurements come first when importing. 

• 
If Left Side X values are negative (common in some CAD programs), they will be converted to + in the import process. 

• 
You will make a large change to your existing Suspension File.  If you have not saved a copy of this suspension's current measurements, you may want to choose 'Cancel' at the next screen to Stop Importing these dimensions.  Then you can save your current settings should you want to return to them if the Import process does not work as you intended. 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 7 New Features in v2.4 
Added several new types of Rear Suspensions (Fig A 6.14A), including: 
• 
Torque Tube Live Axle Fig A 6.14 

• 
Torque Arm Live Axle  Fig A 6.15 

• 
Trailing Arm and Semi Trailing Arm Independent  Fig A 6.16 

• 
5 Link Independent Fig A 6.17 

• 
'Decoupled' Live Axle (bird cage)  Fig A 6.18 


Added 'Four Link' features.  These features lets you enter all holes for all 4 link brackets and see all possible combinations, and how each combination will affect anti-squat and roll steer.  If you are working with a 4 Link type of rear suspension, and are displaying it in 'Side View', and new menu option of '4 Link' will appear for you to click on.  Also, for each 4 link mounting hole, the type of input is specified as 'Input (clc)', where the '(clc)' means if you right click on it, it will ask which side (left or right) bracket you want to specify for entering in several possible mounting holes.  Fig A 6.19 
Added 'Virtual Scales' features, but clicking on the 'Adjust' drop down menu.  Fig A 6.20  This feature has 3 different methods of adjusting corner weights: 
• 
Turning 'Jacking Screws', which changes the preload on the suspension springs on the 4 corners of the vehicle and typically affects Cross Weight only. 

• 
Changing Tire Size, which changes the preload on the suspension springs on the 4 corners of the vehicle and typically affects Cross Weight only. 

• 
Changing Ballast, by adding weight to or removing weight from a certain location of the car, or by moving weight from 


it's current location to some new location. Note, 'Virtual Scales' is only available if you are working with both a front and rear suspension on a vehicle. 
Refined the method of entering data into the measurements 'Grid'.  Now it is not so critical to press <Enter> after each new input. 
Program is now more Vista and Windows 7 compatible, and better able to handle latest versions of Adobe Acrobat. 
Fixed some Watts Link bugs and now you can have the Watts link pivot mounted on either the axle or the frame of the car.  The Watts Link Wizard calculation screen is now easier to get to and suggested by the program to fix Watts Link math errors.  Fig A 6.21 
Added 3rd option for rear suspension springs, to be able to put spring on the upper arm.  For the 'Decoupled' Live Axle (bird cage suspension type, you can also specify the springs are on the bird cage bracket.  Fig A 6.22 
Program now highlights the appropriate cell in the spreadsheet when you click on a point in the layout drawing.  Fig A 6.23 
Added a 'View' button on layout drawing so you can quickly change some Preference settings which affect the layout drawing.    Fig A 6.24. Some of the new Preferences we’ve added which can be changed at the View button include: 
• 
Added 'Bigger' Preference so you can select to make the layout drawing bigger on higher resolution screens. 

• 
Added Preference to allow only 1 side to be drawn in side view (helps avoid confusion). 


Now all versions have the Ball Joint Wizard for more accurately calculating the location of the center of rotation of the ball joint. Fig A 6.25 
Made several changes to graphing to allow for you to press the arrow keys on the keyboard to move graphs around and to not run into limits where zooming and shifting would run into limits. 
Program now automatically checks for old versions 1.1 and 2.0 of Suspension Analyzer on your computer for importing files. 
The File, then Import... feature now looks for old versions 1.1 and 2.0 of Suspension Analyzer on your computer for importing files. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
When choosing different types of suspensions, the program now better checks for valid types of springs which can be chosen, especially for solid axle rear suspensions.  For example, torsion bars, and springs to upper arms can not be used on 3 link.   
Added a Preference so user can enter in dimensions as low as -100 inches. This allows for components normally on one side of the car's centerline to actually be mounted on the other side of the car.  For example, normally the LEFT lower A arm mount on the frame is mounted to the LEFT of the car's centerline.  If you set this preference, you can now mount it, say, -20 inches, so it's actually attached to the frame 20 inches to the RIGHT of the car's centerline. 
Added a Preference to be able to display 'Jacking Component at CG' in the results. This shows the vertical jacking component of the force vector at the location 'of the Center of Gravity.  As this component increases, there is more jacking 'force on the vehicle from that particular tire.  This is very much related 'to Roll Center Height.  Fig A 6.26 
Added several new Graph features: 
• 
Added new Graph option to show the Graph Legend (labels on right side) in Larger and Largest size fonts, found under the Format menu on the Graph Screen.  Fig A 6.27. 

• 
Added new Graph option to show the Dive/Roll on the Y axis, found under the Format menu on the Graph Screen.  This will make graphs similar to that found in other suspension programs.  Note: The cursor will NOT work with this graph setting. Fig A 6.27. 

• 
Added new "Restore Defaults" under Format on Graph Screen, to quickly put graph settings back to those used by most users. Fig A 6.27. 


Added a Preference for "Show Neutral Line for Anti-Squat/Anti-Dive" under the Main Screen Tab.  An Instant Center which falls on this line is considered to have 100 % AntiSquat or 100% AntiDive.  Fig A 6.28. 
Added several new features for Emailing suspension files and results: 
• 
Added Emailing Preference tab with several inputs to allow easy emailing of files, graphs, and printouts to other people. Fig A 6.29. 

• 
Added new Email option under File at main screen to allow user to email a Suspension File to another user of the Suspension Analyzer.  Fig A 6.30. 

• 
Added new Email option under File at main screen to allow user to email a PDF printout of the main screen with suspension layout.  Fig A 6.30. 

• 
Added new Email option under Print on the Report screen to allow user to email a PDF printout of the Report.  Fig A 6.31. 

• 
Added two new Email options under File on the Graph screen to allow user to email a JPG graph.  One option is for 256 color, which creates a higher quality, larger file which takes more time to send and receive.  The other option is for a 16 color graph, which is smaller and faster, however it requires the program to work with the MS Paint program on your computer.  Fig A 6.31. 


Program now has a Help Screen which shows the X, Y and Z measurements for the front and rear suspension.  This is available by clicking on Help at top of main screen, or the first time you click on the data input grid on the main screen for help on an input definition. Fig A 6.32. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Fig A 6.14A Picking New Rear Suspension Types from Vehicle Specs Screen 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Fig A 6.14 Torque Tube Live Rear Axle 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Fig A 6.15 Torque Arm Live Rear Axle 
The Torque Arm is similar to the Torque Tube rear axle. The “ball joint” at the transmission is now replaced with a slider joint. Two lower control arms have been added to resist the axle twisting when viewed from the top (plan view). It then uses some type of lateral locating device (panhard bar shown here) to resist sideways motion. All accelerating and decelerating torque is transferred through the lower control arms. 
This suspension was used in the 4th generation Camaros and Firebirds, 1993-2002. 
Torque Arm is an example file supplied with program for you to evaluate. 
Side view of Torque Arm suspension. 
Program needs location of the Torque Arm and lower control arms. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Fig A 6.16 Trail Arm / Semi Trailing Arm Independent Rear Suspension 
The Trailing Arm style of independent rear suspension has a control arm for each rear wheel, which “hinges” on 2 attachment points on the frame. For the special case of Trailing Arm, the hinge axis is perpendicular to the car’s centerline, and parallel to the ground. For the Semi Trailing Arm, these “hinge” points can be angled with respect to the car’s centerline and the ground. 
Semi Trailing Arm Rear is an example file supplied with program for you to evaluate. 
Top view of Semi Trailing Arm suspension 
Program needs location of the 2 “hinge” points for both arms. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Fig A 6.17 5 Link Independent Rear Suspension 
The 5 Link style of independent rear suspension has 5 links with ball joints on each end. One end of each link attaches to the frame and the other attaches to the wheel spindle. This type of suspension provides lots of flexibility for designing in desired tuning characteristics. However, it can produce “bind” in not done correctly. The program will estimate the amount of bind, so you can watch for this. 
The C4 Corvette, 1984-92 used this type of suspension. 
5 Link Rear is an example file supplied with program for you to evaluate. 
Side view of 5 Link suspension. 
Program needs location of each end of the 5 links, or 10 X, Y and Z coordinates for the left and right side. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 







Fig A 6.22 New Spring Mounts 
Fig A 6.23 Highlighting Cell from Clicking on Layout Drawing 
You can now locate the spring on the upper arm for 4 link (including bird cage) type rear suspensions. Also, if Bird Cage, you can also select to mount on the Bird Cage bracket itself, the most common method for Bird Cage suspensions. 
Click on a point on the suspension layout drawing with your mouse… 
and the measurements for that point will be highlighted in the grid as shown here. 
Note: This features works best if the suspension is drawn at static ride height (Dynamics is turned Off). 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Fig A 6.24 New View Options on Main Screen Click on the View button for access to several commonly used Preference settings. Note: You can also change these settings in the Preferences menu. 
Select to “Draw Layout Biggest Size” and the screen will be redrawn as shown below. 
Layout drawn to Biggest Size. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




Fig A 6.27 New Graph Features 
Classic Font Size 
Standard Y axis layout, with Roll (or Dive or Steer) on X axis. 
Graph has been turned on its side, so the “Roll” axis in this case is the vertical axis and Camber is on the X axis. 
Larger Labels in the Graph Legend 
Click on Restore to Defaults to switch most settings back to “factory” settings. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




Fig A 6.31 Emailing from Report Screen and Graph Screen From Report Screen, click on Print to bring up Print Report Options screen 
Check this new “Email as PDF File” option (and any other options you want for this printed report), then click on Print Report Using These Specs to send. The process is very similar to the emailing PDF file shown in previous Figure A 6.30. 
What we are basically doing is finding a PDF printer type on your computer, printing the report as a PDF file, and then attaching it to an email, all in 1 step. 
Options for emailing graphs under “File” 
If you selected to do, the smaller, faster 16 color graph, the program explains that MSPaint.exe will start up. You must wait while the Suspension Analyzer directs MSPaint.exe to save the graph in the 16 color format. 
Wait while MSPaint.exe is directed to save the file in the 16 color format. 
Choose or enter the email address(es) and the message, then click on the Send key. Also see previous Fig A 630 Or, click on any name in the first column and you will first be presented with a definition of that input as shown to the lower left. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017  Suspension Analyzer  Chapter 4 Examples  
Fig A 6.32 Help Definition Picture Describing X, Y and Z Dimensions  
Click on Help,  
then Show  
Picture of X, Y  
Edit options let you correct mistakes if you did not understand  and Z Measurements.  
how the program wanted the  
dimensions measured.  

Standard definition screen 
The first time you get a definition for each time you start the program, you will be asked if you want a picture of the X, Y and Z dimensions and how they are measured. 
Screen showing how the X, Y and Z dimensions are measured. 
NOTE: If you find you have made a mistake in how you measured a suspension, there is probably an Edit option (click on Edit at top, left corner of main screen) that will let you correct it. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Appendix 8 New Features in v2.4 B 
Version 2.4B adds several features, which we have grouped into these categories: 
New Suspension Types or Options 
The program now allows for solid front axles and for several ways of locating them.  Also included are calculations showing the drive shaft angle or U joint angle changes with suspension movement.  Fig 6.33. 
The program has 2 new steering options: 
1. 
One is where the steering is a steering box, there is no center link.  Instead the tie rod on the spindle from one side is tied directly to the steering box arm.  Then the tie rod from the other spindle is effectively tied to spindle that the steering link is attached to. This is the steering of some Jeep solid axle front suspensions.  Fig 6.34. 

2. 
The second is where the steering is a steering box, but the tie rods do not attach to the center link.  Instead they attach to arms on the steering box and idler arm on arms on opposite side of the center link arms.  This is the steering of some Alfa Romeo suspensions.  Fig 6.35. 


You can now use a panhard bar or a watts link with leaf springs as the Lateral Locator.  Fig 6.36. 
The program has new inputs in Vehicle Specs for: 
1. 
Front, rear or all wheel drive, and what percent of the power is being delivered through the front drive tires.  Fig 6.37. 

2. 
The program has a new input in Vehicle Specs for inputs or inboard or outboard brakes at either the front or rear suspension. Fig 6.37. 

3. 
Unsprung weight is now an input for front and rear and is used to determine natural frequencies and some handling characteristics. Prior to this, the program assumed a certain percent of the vehicle’s weight was unsprung.  Fig 6.37. 


There is a Calculation Utility “Clc” screen for entering in inputs for the King Pins for solid axle front suspensions.  Fig 6.38. 
The program now allows you to specify what the opposite end of the car is doing.  This lets you apply "pitch" to the car to see what happens to the calculations. Fig 6.39. 
You can now enter specs for bump springs for the front and/or the rear suspension.  (This feature is not available for push or pull rod type suspensions.) There is also a Clc screen to calculate these specs, which can be handy if you are working with “stacked” springs. Fig 6.40. 
The program now calculates and displays new outputs, like Bump Spring Force and Dynamic (after dive and roll are applied) Roll Stiffness, Roll Couple, Front and Rear Lateral Load Transfer, and Natural Frequencies.  This is very handy to watch what happens once the Bump Springs are encountered with suspension movement.  Fig 6.40. 
There are new inputs for Ride Height.  You can then watch Ride Height change when you apply Bump and Roll and the new Pitch input to the suspension. When you do a top view of the suspension, the location where the Ride Height measurements are made are drawn as small boxes.  These measurement locations are located in the Vehicle Specs screen, as they always have been. Fig 6.41. 
New Graph, Report or Print Features 
If you have swapped graph axes, like camber on the horizontal axes and movement on the vertical axes, and use the cursor, it is horizontal. Fig 6.46. 
You can now include a picture file with the suspension which will be drawn on the main screen if there is room, and included in printouts of reports or graphs as you direct.  Fig 6.47 and 6.49. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
The program has new print options for graphs and reports of including the suspension picture file (if any).  Fig 6.48. You can now include the data table with a graph. Fig 6.49. The printed Graph comments have new options and are described under File, then Printed Comments in the Graph Screen.  Fig 
6.49. You can now graph the Jacking Component, Bump Spring Force, and Ride Height.  Fig 6.47. The Data Type you have picked to graph is now displayed under the list.  Since the list is long and only the first picked data type 
is graphed, many times a type could be picked that you did not see in the list.  Fig 6.47. 
Other New Program Features 
The program now reads some types of Bill Mitchell’s WinGeo (.gem) files, like double a arm and MacPhearson strut.  Fig 6.43. There have been several updates to Emailing Preferences to work better with modern changes to emailing protocols.  Fig 6.44. File Comments are now shown on the main screen if there is enough room.  Fig 6.33. Zoom options for the drawing on the main screen are now included under the "View" menu button options. The program now draws the CG in side view.  Fig 6.39. 'The program now remembers some inputs you have entered in the "Clc" calculation utility screens, like for spring rate, roll 
'bar rate, and the new Unsprung Weight, and more.  These are saved with the file, so in the future you will know where, say, the 
roll bar rate came from. Fig 6.45. The program now remembers the size and position of the main screen when you restart the program.  This way, when you reopen the program, it should revert right back to the same position or size you last arranged. 
The “Advanced” button for Save As now uses current folder as the default folder.   The program now better draws extension lines when the lines extend WAY OFF the drawing screen so as to look more realistic. The program now marks invalid solid front suspensions as "na" in the Vehicle Specs screen. The Company Logo graphic now appears on the main screen.  Fig 6.33. The program now has substituted “Bump Springs” for "Symmetric Chassis" in the Vehicle Specs screen.  This Symmetric 
Chassis feature was never activated in earlier versions. Program now more reliably saves and reads its configuration info so the config file is less likely to get corrupted. If the Registered Name or Registered Code becomes corrupted, the program now allows an easy fix by contacting Performance 
Trends. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.33 New Solid Axle Front Suspension Options 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.34 New Steering System Option, “Steering Box, rod attaches to right spindle” 
2 new steering options, this one common on Jeeps 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.35 New Steering System Option, “Steering Box: Rods attach to rotating arms” 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.36 Leaf Springs now allow for Lateral Locators, Panhard Bar or Watts Link 
Choose this new “Leaf Spring (with lateral locator)” option for the “Lateral Locating Linkage” options to appear. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 





Figure 6.41 New Inputs of Ride Height 
In Vehicle specs, the location where Ride Height is measured can be entered here. 
In “Top View”, the location where Ride Height is measured (as entered in the screen shown above) is shown by a light red and light blue box. 
You will enter the Static Ride Height (typically the clearance between the ground and the vehicle’s frame) in the first column. Then the new Dynamic Ride Height (clearance) is displayed in the second column, with the difference in the third. In this case, the Left side Ride Height changed from 4 to 3.63 with 1” of dive and 2 deg of roll, a change of -.37 inches. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 




Figure A 6.46 Horizontal Cursors 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 6.48 New Options for Printing Graphs and Reports 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure 6.49 New Options on a Graph Printout 


(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


Appendix 9 New Features in v2.4 C 
Version 2.4C adds several features, which include: 
New Suspension Types or Options 
Roll Center for Double A Arm and McPhearson Strut suspensions are now calculate using the Force Based Roll Center methodology.  This method is more accurate and realistic.  You will no longer see roll centers being calculated, say, 50 or 1000 inches beyond the track of the car, which made very little sense.  There is a Preference Setting which lets you revert back to the old “Kinematic” method of calculating Roll Center, which was what we did before this new v2.4C.  Figs A 6.50 and A 6.51. 
De Dion rear suspension is now one of the Rear Suspension Types you can choose from.  The De Dion is somewhat of a hybrid.  It is like a independent rear suspension in that the differential or transaxle is mounted to the chasses, eliminating unsprung weight. But for suspension geometry, it is like a solid axle (live axle).  There is a beam that solidly connects the wheel spindles on right and left. Fig A 6.52. 
You can now specify a Jacob’s Ladder as a possible “lateral locator” for solid axle suspensions.  Fig A 6.53. 
Now if you specify either end of the car as having traction (driving tires) and the suspension type is independent, fields open up for you to enter the location of the center’s of the CV or U joints.  The program will calculate the length of the half shafts connecting these 2 joints. Then when you have the suspension go through motion, the program will calculate how much the length changes. Note: You can not choose to use Push or Pull Rod suspension types to be able to specify CV joints.  Figs A 
6.54 and A 6.55. 
New History Log Feature 
We have added a “History Log” to the ways of opening a file.  The History remembers the last 100 files you have been working with. The number of files saved is selectable in the Preferences menu.  This can be a very handy to be able to go back and see what files you have been working with.  Fig A 6.56. 
Click on File, then Open from History Log at the Main Screen to obtain the History Log shown below in Figure 3.37.  This screen shows a summary of the results for the last 100 tests you have worked with (started new, opened, graphed, etc.)  When you work with a new test, it is added to the top of the History Log, and (if the Log is full) the last run drops off the bottom of the list. The History Log is an alternate way to Open tests which have been saved to the Test Library.  The advantage of the History Log is it lists the tests you most recently worked with at the top, making them easier to find.  Fig A 6.56. 
Suspension File and Path Click on Suspension File and Path and you are asked if you want to retrieve the file which produced these results. Fig A 6.56. 
Graph?  Choose to Graph certain files by clicking on the “Graph ?” column to insert a Yes there.  Click on an existing “Yes” to remove it.  Files marked Yes to Graph will be graphed when you click on the “Graph Tests Marked 'Yes' ”.  The first file (usually the current file you are working with) is always graphed even with no Yes marked.  The number of files actually graphed is limited by available space, usually a limit of about 40 graph lines total.  Figs A 6.56 and A 6.57. 
Std Graph Title  Click on “Std Graph Title” to change the Standard Title for this file.  The program will default to the file name, but you can change it to most anything you want.  (You can also specify 'Alternate' titles and legend names by clicking on 'Format' at the top of the Graph Screen, then “Edit Printed Comments and Data Output”.)  Figs A 6.56 and A 6.57. 
Save?  Choose to Save certain Files to the History Log by clicking on the Save column to insert a Yes there.  Files marked Yes to Save move to the bottom of the History Log as more runs are made, but will not fall off the History Log.  NOTE: If a file falls off the History Log, it is not deleted.  You just have to open it via File, then Open, or add to a graph via Add Suspension.  Fig A 6.57. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Front Suspension / Rear Suspension  These columns show the type of suspension for each end of the vehicle. History Log Commands Graph Tests marked ‘Yes’ Click this to close the History Log and graph all files with a Yes in the “Graph ?” column. Graph Current Test Only Click this to close the History Log and graph only the first test in the History Log, which is 
the file you are working with on the main screen. 
Clear (erase History Log) Click this to erase all files out of the History log except those with a Yes in the “Save?” column or the current file in the top row. Print You can print the History Log on a printer by clicking on the 'Print' menu command.  Note that the printed History Log 
will be most readable when the Page Orientation is in Landscape setting. 
Note that just the Test File Name stays in the History Log.  Should you delete the file using the Open (from all saved tests) command, the test file will be deleted but the name will stay in the History Log.  When you try to open it or graph if from the History Log, you will get note saying the file can not be found. 
New Spring and Shock Calculations 
The program now has screens for entering Shock Dyno data.  Click on Vehicle Specs, then Shock Data for this screen.  If you have Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno software, there is a “Send” feature to automatically send shock dyno data to your computer’s “clip board”.  Then in the Suspension Analyzer’s Shock Dyno screen, click on the “Load from Shock Dyno” command and you can paste the shock dyno data into this screen.  Figs A 6.58 and A 6.59 and A 6.60. 
The program now displays the spring, bump spring and anti-roll bar forces as the suspension goes through dive, roll, steer and pitch. In addition, there is a new Shock Velocity input field, where you can enter a shock velocity.  If you have also entered Shock Data, it will also calculate the shock force for this velocity.  NOTE: When the shock is compressing, this is considered a negative velocity (shock getting smaller), and when the shock is extending this is considered a positive velocity.  Other company’s software may consider these velocities differently.  Fig A 6.61. 
If you run a screen animation, the Animate screen now has a Segment Time input.  This time along with the motion for that segment lets the program calculate a shock velocity.  For example, if the Segment is for 2” of Dive and the Segment Time is 1 second, then vehicle’s dive velocity will be 2”/second.  Depending on the shock’s motion ratio, that could be, say, 1.5”/second.  Everything being the same, if you had entered a Time Segment of 0.2 seconds, the velocity would be 7.5”/second.  Fig A 6.62. 
If you have imported Data Logger data to the Suspension Analyzer and do an Animation, the program will calculate the Shock Velocity from the Data Logger data.  It will be displayed in the Shock Velocity field, and below it will be the Shock Force for that velocity, based on the Shock Dyno data you have entered. NOTE: The most accurate Shock Velocity and Force data is calculated when the program has calculated the shock’s position both previous and after the current position.  Therefore, until the program has gone through a complete lap of your Data Logger data, the shock data is a less accurate estimate based on the current shock position and the previous shock position (not the next shock position).  Data Logger Version Only.  Figs A 6.62 and A 6.63. 
The program will also change the Handling Rating based on the Shock Force resulting from the Shock Velocity data entered. 
Because the Shock Absorber features are involved and can produce unexpected results if you are not aware of what you are doing, there is a Preference setting to turn them On and Off.  The default is the Shock Absorber inputs are turned Off.  Turn them On in Preferences.  Figs A 6.51 and A 6.58. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
New Ball Joint Bind Feature (Data Logger Version Only) 
The advanced Data Logger version of the program now lets you enter the Ball Joint Angle.  This is the angle between ball joint stud position and position of ball joint stud when perfectly centered, perfectly vertical with respect to the ball joint.  The program will then calculate the angle change of the ball joint stud as the suspension goes through motion.  You can also enter a Max Ball Joint Angle. If the program calculates that the Ball Joint Angle exceeds the Max Ball Joint Angle, it will report this condition as Ball Joint Bind. It will also calculate Ball Joint Bind which is the amount the Ball Joint Angle has exceeded the Max Ball Joint Angle.  Fig A 6.68 and A 6.71. 
There is a Calculation screen utility to help you determine the Ball Joint Angle at ride height.  The program knows the Spindle Angle from the ball joint locations.  It asks you to enter the Ball Joint Flange Angle, which is the angle of the ball joint body with respect to horizontal. This can be found by placing an inclinometer (angle finder) on any flat part of the ball joint.  Fig A 
6.68 and A 6.69. 
You can Graph or Report either Ball Joint Angle or Ball Joint Bind Angle.  Ball Joint Bind Angle will be zero until the Ball Joint Angle exceeds Max Ball Joint Angle. Then this angle will be the angle amount Ball Joint Angle has exceeded Max Ball Joint Angle. If Max Ball Joint Angle is 25 degrees and Ball Joint Angle is 28 degrees, Ball Joint Bind Angle will be 3 degrees.  Fig A 6.70 and A 6.71. 
Other New Program Features 
Under the “View” list of options, a new choice of Watch Rows has been added.  Here you can specify from 0 to 6 rows of calculated data for you to “watch”. These rows are listed directly below the suspension drawing so they will always appear in the same place.  This way you do not have to scroll through results for the data you are interested in.  You can choose to have different rows “watched” on the front and rear suspension screens.  Fig A 6.64. 
We have added more options and accuracy to the Anti-Roll Bar Rate Calculator utility.  Figs A 6.65 and  A 6.66. These include: 
• 
Taking the flex of the bars connected to the suspension members on the end of the Anti-Roll Bars into account.  This detail can significantly soften up the bar’s overall spring rate. 

• 
Adding a feature to estimate a “blade” or “sword” anti-roll bar.  This type of bar has a connector link that is very thin.  The flex on this connector link will significantly soften up the bar.  However, this connector link can be turned so it becomes less flexible, significantly raising the bar’s overall spring rate. 


When opening files, there is a new option for “List by Access Date”, in addition to the original “List by File Name” which lists the files alphabetically. List by Access Date is a chronological list, where the files you most recently worked with are listed at the top, with the date you last opened them.  Figs A 6.67. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.50 New Force Based Roll Centers 
Force Base Roll Centers typically do not move around as much with Dive and Roll 
F.B.
 indicates “Force Based” Roll Center Calculations 

K.
 indicates Kinematic 


Kinematic Roll Center moves left as suspension goes through -3 degrees of roll. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.51 New Preferences: Force Based Roll Centers and Shock Data Analysis 
Pick method here 
If you pick Force Based, you must specify how much traction is coming from the outside tire in a turn. 70% is a good assumption for most situations. 
New Preference to all Shock Data to be entered and analyzed. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A 6.53 Jacob’s Ladder 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.54 Independent Suspension Half Shaft Motion 
Independent suspension type 
Your choice here determines if the traction is coming from the front or rear suspension (front or rear wheel drive). If you pick something other than 0% or 100%, the program assumes all wheel drive, that there are half shafts on both suspensions, if they are independent. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.55 Independent Suspension Half Shaft Motion, cont 
Half shafts 
CV Joint Locations 
Half shaft motion 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A 6.57 History Log Features for Graph Screen 
This is the Std Graph Title, as shown in Fig A 6.56. 
If there are more lines in the legend (labels) than can appear on the screen, buttons will appear here to let you scroll them up or down so you can see them all. 
A button can also appear here if the labels have extended off the top of the graph. 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.58 Copying Shock Data from Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno Software  
If you have an appropriate Shock Dyno Plus version, you can click on the ‘Send’ option and be presented with the 4 corners of the car. For each corner you can select which shock or coil over’s data to send, or choose “None” for that particular corner. You may have to open other Shock Dyno files, do the Send and select different corners of the car for sending shock data for different shocks. 
As shown in the picture, the Export Data will copy this data to the computer’s clipboard.  This is the same process as doing a Windows Ctrl-C or a Copy process. Therefore, do not do a copy or paste command before you go to your Suspension Analyzer program to import this data. 
You must turn on this Preference before you can do any Shock Data Analysis in the Suspension Analyzer 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A 6.60 Importing Shock Data from Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno Software  
Click here 
and this new 
frame will 
appear with 
the shock 
data loaded 
from the 
clipboard 
displayed. 
Click the Import button to import the proper data to the proper Shock Absorber positions, Right Front, Left Front, etc. This will be as you directed in the Shock Dyno software. 
Performance Trends’ Shock Dyno 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 



Figure A 6.62 Spring and Shock Force Data, Simple Animation 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.63 Spring and Shock Force Data, Animation from Data Logger File 

(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.64 Watch Rows to Watch Data of Particular Interest 
Choose Watch Rows 
Watch Rows section 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Figure A 6.65 More Detailed and Accurate Anti-Roll Bar Calculation Utility 
Several new choices which account for flex in the arms, and the new “blade” option which has adjustable flex. 
Drawing helps explain inputs. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 






Figure A 6.71 Ball Joint Angle Movement Graph 
Second graph was done by selecting this “Bind” option. 
Graphing the Angle. 
Graphing Bind. 
(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 

(C)
 Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 


(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Index 
4 wheel drive, 167 
5 Link Independent, 147 
Ackerman, 1, 18, 25, 26, 38, 65, 73, 101 Ackrmn Error, deg, 26, 65, 73 Active Bar Length, 57 Adjust Options, 6, 43 Adjust Ride Height, 45, 46 Adobe PDF, 148 Alfa Romeo steering, 167 All wheel drive, 167 Alternate Location, 34 Angle, 23, 25, 26, 65, 72, 117, 118, 125, 133, 185 Animate, 6, 30, 49, 141, 144, 184 Anti Dive, %, 27, 66, 73 Anti-Dive %, 99 Aspect Ratio, 53 Assumptions, 7, 3, 113 
Backspacing, 46 Backup, 123, 133, 139 Ball Joint, 147, 185 Ball Joint Angle, 185 Ball Joint Bind, 185 Ball Joint Wizard, 147 Ballast, 147 Bellcrank Axis Front, 22, 23 Bill Mitchell files, 168 Bind, 185 Bird Cage, 147 Blade Anti-Roll Bar, 185 Brake, 142, 144 Brakes, inboard, 133, 167 Brakes, outboard, 167 Bump spring force, 167, 168 Bump springs, 167, 168 
C.G., 51, 52 
Calc utility, remember inputs, 168 
Calculation Menu, 6, 9, 10, 21, 51, 54, 56, 91 
Calculation Menus, 6, 9, 51 
Calculation utility, remember inputs, 168 
Camber, 1, 2, 12, 13, 16, 24, 26, 33, 43, 45, 47, 65, 72, 92, 99, 101, 108, 113, 115, 116, 118, 133, 136, 139 
Camber Gain, 1, 2, 12, 16, 24, 33, 99, 113, 115, 116, 118, 133, 139 
Caster Trail, 24, 25, 65, 72, 117, 118 
Center Car based on Tire Tracks, 41 
Center Link Pivots, 22 
Centerline, 19, 39, 92 
Centimeters, 133 
CG, Center of Gravity, 37, 92, 128, 148, 168 
Change, 7, 20, 29, 45, 101, 116 Chassis #, 37, 38 Circumference, 35, 45, 53 Clc button, 51, 56 Clc buttons, 51 Clc utility, remember inputs, 168 Coil Springs, 54 Comments, 33, 59, 60, 94, 168 Company Logo picture file, 168 Cross Weight, 147 Cursor, 74, 76, 104 Customer, 12, 35, 37, 38, 60 CV Joints, 183 
Data Logger, 22, 133, 139, 141, 142, 143, 184, 185 
Data Logger Option, 133, 141 
Data Logger Version, 184, 185 
Data table, graph, 168 
DataMite, 141, 142, 144 
De Dion, 183 
Decoupled Live Axle, 147 
Depth, 18, 20, 34, 93, 128 
Dive, 1, 7, 8, 13, 16, 18, 23, 24, 27, 33, 37, 38, 48, 49, 50, 63, 64, 65, 66, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 92, 101, 102, 103, 104, 110, 113, 116, 117, 118, 148, 184 
Double A Arm, 126, 127, 128, 133, 183 
Dynamic, 6, 7, 8, 13, 16, 18, 20, 23, 24, 66, 73, 101, 102, 167 
Edit, 6, 7, 19, 29, 41, 42, 43, 93, 133, 183 Emailing, 61, 142, 148, 168 Ending Position, 50 Engine RPM, 142, 144 English, 133 Extension Lines, 1, 35 
File, 2, 7, 12, 13, 20, 28, 29, 34, 44, 45, 48, 59, 60, 67, 80, 81, 82, 83, 89, 90, 94, 96, 99, 105, 121, 123, 124, 128, 133, 139, 141, 142, 146, 147, 148, 168, 183, 184, 185 
File, company logo picture, 168 
File, picture, 167, 168 
Files, Bill Mitchell, 168 
Find, 47, 93, 133, 135 
Find Optimum Settings, 47 
First Motion, 49 
FLLD% (front lateral load distribution, handling), 47, 115, 133 
Folder, 12, 35, 60, 95, 99, 121, 124 
Force Based Roll Center, 183 
Format, 148, 183 
Freeform, 133 
Friction Circle, 144 
Front axles, solid, 167 
Front Lateral Load Distribution, 115, 133, 134, 135 
Front Suspension, 19, 56, 126, 128, 184 
Front wheel drive, 167 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Going To, 64, 65, 71, 72 
Graph, 7, 8, 12, 30, 35, 36, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 103, 104, 105, 109, 110, 125, 127, 144, 148, 167, 168, 183, 184, 185 
Graph axes, horizontal, 167 
Graph cursor, horizontal, 167 
Graph Legend, 148 
Graph Type, 70, 109 
Graph, data table, 168 
Graph, printed comments, 168, 183 
Graph, Restore Defaults, 148 
Graph?, 183 
Graphs, 6, 13, 30, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 99, 103, 105 
Gs, 133 
Height, 18, 19, 20, 34, 37, 45, 51, 52, 92, 99, 136, 138, 167 Height of C.G., 37, 51, 92 Height of C.G., inches, 37 Help, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 30, 36, 51, 60, 125, 133, 148 History Log, 69, 78, 183, 184 Hold At, 65, 72 Hollow, 54, 56, 57 Horizontal graph axes, 167 Horizontal graph cursor, 167 
Ideal Ackrmn Toe In, deg, 25 Import, 1, 133, 139, 145, 146, 147 Import Dimensions, 139, 145 Inclinometer, 185 Include Suspension Comments, 80 Increment, 63, 70 Installation, 6, 4 Instant Center, 1, 13, 19, 26, 27, 35, 66, 73, 148 Instant Center Height, 26 Instant Center Left, 26 Instant Centers, 1, 13, 19, 27, 35, 66, 73 
Jacking Component, 148, 168 Jacking on Spring, 45 Jacking Screws, 45, 147, 148 Jacob’s Ladder, 183 Jeep steering, 167 JPG, 148 
KG, 133 Kinematic Roll Center, 183 King Pin, 13, 19, 24, 26, 65, 72, 117, 118, 167 King Pin Angle, 13, 19, 24, 26, 65, 72 King Pin Angle, deg, 26 
Lateral Locator, 133, 137, 167, 183 Layout, 35, 99 Leaf Springs, 54, 55, 133, 138, 167 Length, 13, 23, 27, 57 Letter Tire Size, 53 Lever Arm Length, 56 library, 12, 82, 104, 123 Library, 81, 82, 83, 121, 183 List by Access Date, 185 List by File Name, 185 Location, 54, 136 Logger, 184 Lower Arm Len True/Frnt/Rr, 27 Lower Arm Length, 27 Lower Ball Joint, 21 Lower Frame Pivot, 19, 21 Lower Frame Pivot, Front, 21 Lower Frame Pivot, Rear, 21 Lower Sensor Mount, 22 Lower Shock Mount, 22 Lower Spring Pad, 22 Lt Side, Behind Wheel Center, 39 
Main Menu, 28, 43 Max Ball Joint Angle, 185 McPhearson, 20, 31, 127, 128, 183 Metric, 53, 133, 134 Milliken, 119, 134, 135 Motion Ratio, 24, 33, 113 Move Points, 41 
Network, 34 Neutral Line, 148 New Track, 46 Number of Active Coils, 55 
Offset, 43, 46 
Open, 7, 12, 13, 28, 34, 59, 81, 82, 84, 99, 123, 128, 183, 184 
Open, List by Access Date, 185 
Open, List by File Name, 185 
optimize, 108, 110 
optimum, 1, 3, 30, 47, 48, 108, 115, 116 
Other Specs, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 18, 20, 29, 30, 37, 45, 51, 56, 59, 79, 89, 90, 92, 94, 95 
Out, 18, 19, 20, 34, 89, 93, 107, 116, 136 
Output, 6, 61, 63, 70, 79, 99, 125, 183 
P Metric, 53 
PDF, 148 
PERFTRNS.PTI, 83, 121, 123, 124 
Picture file, 167, 168 
Pitch, 167, 184 
Preferences, 6, 7, 12, 15, 16, 18, 24, 25, 28, 30, 33, 34, 44, 60, 65, 73, 80, 95, 99, 113, 147, 168, 183, 184 
Primary Type, 64, 65, 71, 72 
print, 1, 20, 29, 79, 80, 89, 91, 96, 99, 121, 168, 184 
Print, 20, 29, 79, 80, 89, 90, 99, 121, 148, 167, 184 
Printed comments, graph, 168, 183 
Printer, 6, 29, 35, 61, 74, 79, 80 
printer orientation, 133 
printing, 29, 74, 80, 89 
Pushrod Mount on Arm, 23 
Pushrod Mount on Bellcrank, 23 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Radius, 18, 25, 52, 54, 65, 73, 117, 118 
Rating Type, 53 
Readme.doc, 2 
README.DOC, 2 
Rear Lateral Load Distribution, 133 
Rear wheel drive, 167 
Registered, 3, 5, 168 
Registered Owner, 3, 5 
Request Report Comment, 80 
Restore, 133, 139, 148 
Restore Defaults, 148 
Ride height, 1, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 108, 138, 167, 168, 185 
Ride Height, 1, 39, 43, 44, 45, 167, 168 
Rim Offset, 46 
Rim Width, 46 
rocker arm, 133 
Roll, 1, 7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 26, 27, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 48, 49, 50, 56, 57, 59, 63, 64, 65, 66, 70, 71, 72, 73, 82, 84, 89, 92, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 105, 108, 109, 110, 113, 115, 116, 117, 128, 133, 134, 135, 136, 138, 147, 148, 167, 168, 183, 184, 185 
Roll Bar, 13, 20, 23, 30, 37, 38, 56, 57, 59, 89, 185 
Roll Bar Rate, lb/in, 38 
Roll Center, 1, 12, 13, 18, 19, 26, 27, 34, 35, 48, 66, 70, 73, 82, 84, 99, 109, 110, 113, 115, 116, 117, 135, 136, 148, 183 
Roll Center Height, 18, 26, 27, 66, 70, 73, 110, 136, 148 
Roll Center Left, 18, 27, 66, 70, 73, 99 
Roll Center Motion, 70, 109, 110 
Roll Stiffness, 1, 27, 128, 167 
Roll Stiffness, ft-lbs/deg, 27, 128 
Rolling Radius, 53, 54 
Rt Side, Behind Wheel Center, 39 
Rt Side, From Centerline, 39 
Safe, 3, 46, 47, 108, 139 
Safety, 4, 3, 47, 108 
Save, 1, 7, 28, 34, 44, 45, 48, 82, 83, 84, 90, 95, 96, 168, 183, 184 
Save As, 28, 44, 45, 48, 84, 90, 95, 96, 168 
Scrub Radius, 24, 26, 117, 118 
Secondary Type, 64, 65, 71, 72, 105 
Semi Trailing Arm, 147 
Sensor, 22, 24, 38, 39, 125, 133 
Settings, 63, 70, 71, 102 
Setup, 29, 74, 133 
SETUP, 4 
Shim, 1, 44, 47, 48, 107 
Shim Adjustment, 44, 48 
Shock Absorber, 184 
Shock Data, 184 
Shock Dyno, 184 
Shock Force, 184 
Shock Velocity, 184 
Side, 7, 15, 16, 19, 39, 41, 53, 57, 58, 63, 70, 72, 99, 116, 125, 146, 147 
Solid front axles, 167 Spindle Angle, 26, 185 
Spindle Angle, deg, 26 
Spindle Drop, 1 
Spindle Length, 27 
Spring, 1, 8, 13, 18, 20, 23, 24, 51, 54, 55, 133, 138, 140, 184 
Spring Angle from Front, 23 
Spring Angle from Side, 23 
Spring Length, 13, 23, 55 
Spring Rate, 8, 18, 20, 24, 51, 54 
Spring Rate/Wheel Rate, 24 
Spring Width, 55 
Springs, 38, 89, 92, 126, 140 
Springs, bump, 167 
Starting From, 64, 65, 71, 72 
Static, 7, 16, 18, 20, 23, 24, 33, 66, 73, 99, 100, 102, 107, 115, 116 
Static Camber, 116 
Std Graph Title, 183 
Steer, 1, 2, 7, 8, 13, 16, 18, 23, 24, 33, 48, 49, 50, 63, 64, 65, 70, 71, 72, 100, 101, 102, 103, 110, 136 
Steering, 7, 18, 20, 21, 22, 26, 38, 39, 41, 43, 47, 48, 57, 58, 59, 89, 90, 91, 92, 141, 142, 144 
Steering Arm Length, 58 
Steering Arm Points To, 57 
Steering Arm Side Angle, 58 
Steering Arm Top Angle, 58 
Steering Sensor, 22, 39, 89 
Steering Swivel Axis, 21, 90, 91 
Steering Swivel Axis Lower, 21 
Steering Swivel Axis Upper, 21 
Steering, Alfa Romeo, 167 
Steering, Jeep, 167 
Step Size, 64, 65, 71, 72 
Susp. Travel Sensor, 38, 89 
Suspension, 1, 4, 6, 7, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 41, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 57, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 89, 90, 94, 95, 96, 99, 100, 101, 104, 105, 107, 108, 109, 110, 113, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 130, 133, 135, 138, 139, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 167, 168, 183, 184, 185 
Suspension Layout, 6, 13, 15, 16, 17, 35, 49, 99, 101, 146 
Suspension Library, 6, 12, 28, 73, 81, 82, 121, 123, 124 
Swivel Axis Front Angle, 58 
Swivel Axis Side Angle, 58 
Symmetric Chassis, 38, 168 
Tech Help, 3, 5 Throttle, 142, 144 Tie Rod Length, 27 Tie Rod on Rack, 21 Tie Rod on Spindle, 21 Time Segment, 184 Tire Circumference, 24, 44, 45, 46, 51, 53, 92 Tire Radius, 52 Tire Scrub, 24, 66, 73 
(C) Performance Trends Inc 2017 Suspension Analyzer Chapter 4 Examples 
Titles, 67, 74, 183 
Toe In, deg, 8, 25, 26, 65, 72, 73 
Toe In, in, 25, 35, 65, 73 
Toe In, inches, 25, 35, 65, 73 
Torque Arm, 147 
Torque Tube, 147 
Torsion Bar, 54, 56, 133 
Torsion Bar Diameter, 56 
Torsion Bar Length, 56 
Torsion Bars, 54, 56 
Track Map, 133, 142, 144 
Trailing Arm, 147 
transmission, 133 
Transmission, 138 
Transmission Angle, 133, 138 
Tread, 24, 53, 92 
Tread Width, 24, 53, 92 
Ttread, 24 
Type, 2, 5, 8, 18, 20, 21, 38, 51, 53, 54, 56, 59, 63, 64, 65, 70, 71, 72, 168 
U Joints, 183 Unsprung weight, 167, 183 Upper Arm Len True/Frnt/Rr, 27 Upper Arm Length, 27 Upper Ball Joint, 20 Upper Frame Pivot, 20, 21 Upper Frame Pivot, Front, 20 Upper Frame Pivot, Rear, 21 Upper Sensor Mount, 22 Upper Shock Mount, 22 Upper Spring Pad, 22 
Virtual Scales, 147 Vista, 2, 147 
Watch Rows, 185 Watts Link Wizard, 147 Watts Linkage, 133 Wheel Rate, 1, 24 Wheel Rim Diameter, 54 Wheel Spacer Width, 46 Wheel/Tire, 43, 46 Wheelbase, 26, 38, 51, 52 Wheelbase, inches, 38 Windows, 1, 3, 1, 2, 28, 29, 34, 35, 74, 83, 84, 121, 122, 123, 124, 147 Windows 7, 2, 147 Worksheet, 20, 29, 89, 90, 92, 93 
X, Y and Z Measurements (definition), 146, 148 
Zoom, 133, 138, 147, 168 




