





          RSA
   Computer Software
    for Drag Racers





QUARTER jr
Version 3.2














-----------------------
Racing Systems Analysis
-----------------------



















Racing Systems Analysis







QUARTER jr
Version 3.2


By:  Patrick Hale













             Copyright 2005 RSA
             Phoenix, Arizona  USA
             www.QUARTERjr.com















COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2005 by RSA. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, transmitted, stored in a retrieval system, or translated into any language or computer language, in any form or by any means; electronic, mechanical, magnetic, optical, chemical, manual or otherwise; without the prior written consent of Racing Systems Analysis.









DISCLAIMER

RSA reserves the right to revise this publication and to make changes from time to time in the context hereof, without the obligation of RSA to notify any person of such revision or changes.













ii




TABLE OF CONTENTS



CHAPTER 1:  INTRODUCTION

General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Installing your program disk. . . . . . 14



CHAPTER 2:  SAMPLE QUARTER jr ANALYSIS

Getting started . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Sample QUARTER jr analysis. . . . . . . 22



CHAPTER 3:  THE COMMAND MENUS

The command menus . . . . . . . . . . . 31

File: Open. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
File: Save. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
File: Save As . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
File: Print . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
File: Preferences . . . . . . . . . . . 34
File: Exit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

Timeslip: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-4

Graph:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-5

Window: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-5
Window: Cascade Graphs. . . . . . . . . 3-6
Window: Tile Graphs . . . . . . . . . . 3-6





                                        iii




CHAPTER 4:  INPUT VARIABLES

How to input. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4-4
Engine  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Transmission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Final drive . . . . . . . . . . . . . .410

Frontal area worksheet. . . . . . . . .4-12
Tire width worksheet. . . . . . . . . .4-13
Motorcycle final drive worksheet. . . .4-14




CHAPTER 5:  CALCULATED OUTPUT

Timeslip. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5-1
Detailed parameters . . . . . . . . . . 51
Vehicle performance graphs. . . . . . . 5-4



















iv




CHAPTER 1:  INTRODUCTION


General


Congratulations on your purchase of one of the most cost effective pieces of drag racing speed equipment that is presently available  QUARTER jr.


Today, in this 21st century, the sport of drag racing has attained a level of sophistication that makes the personal computer an important tool for every racer to use, Professional and Sportsman alike.


Now, QUARTER jr unlocks the power and convenience of the PC for every drag racer who wants to understand and improve the performance of their own vehicle.


The winning racecar combination is the quest of all drag racers.  "What rear end gear should I run?  Which transmission ratios?  What  size  tires?  What stall speed converter?  When should I shift?  What should my next dialin be?"


These are but a few of the many decisions a racer must make when setting up a new racecar, or when trying to make an existing vehicle quicker, faster and more consistent.



                                        11





In the past, the approach has usually been to copy what the next guy has, and then start changing things, one at a time.



This is a costly, time consuming process which usually ends up with a worn out vehicle and a shop or garage full of worthless spare parts.



You can't afford to try everything at the same time and varying track conditions can cloud the results of even the best backtoback testing.



With competitive drag racing being a contest of hundredths, or even thousandths of a second, only a computer can provide the necessary consistency and accuracy to optimize your vehicle's dragstrip performance.



RSA (Racing Systems Analysis) was started in 1978 by Patrick Hale, a local drag racer from Arizona.  After drag racing several vehicles while attending Mechanical Engineering school at Arizona State University; he developed a computer model for quartermile vehicle performance analysis.



12





Access to powerful computers was limited in those days, so only the services of the computer program could be marketed, and therefore its general use was limited.



Today, the widespread availability of the PC has made this powerful computer program, QUARTER jr, available to everyone.



The services of RSA are also available to customize QUARTER jr to your specific needs; or to write new, engineering analysis type software for other applications.  Give RSA a call or e-mail.  We will be happy to discuss these possibilities, and future RSA products with you.






                Patrick Hale
                President, MSME, SAE Member

                Racing Systems Analysis
                Phoenix, Arizona  USA

                Phone: 602.992.2586
                Web:   www.QUARTERjr.com





                                        13




Installing your program disk


1.  Start by inserting the QUARTER jr program CD into the appropriate drive in your PC.


2.  Use the mouse to select Run from the Start menu.


3.  In the Command Line box, type d:setup.exe depending on which drive you are using to read the QUARTER jr setup CD.


4.  Use the mouse to click the OK button.


5.  Follow the instructions displayed on your computer monitor.  When you are finished, remove the CD.


6.  The setup process creates a folder named QUARTER jr in the Program Files folder.  This folder contains the icon for the QUARTER jr software which has the name Qjr.exe.


7.  You can now create a Shortcut for the Qjr.exe file and Send it to the Windows desktop if you like.  You normally do this by right-clicking the mouse on the Qjr.exe program icon and then choosing Create Shortcut from the drop-down list.



14




CHAPTER 2:  SAMPLE QUARTER jr ANALYSIS



Getting Started

In this chapter, we will walk you through a sample, hands on, vehicle quartermile performance analysis.  So please sit at your computer while you read this chapter.  QUARTER jr is designed to be very easy to use, even for the first time or novice computer user.


You can begin using QUARTER jr in one of two ways.  For now, use the mouse to double-click on the application icon in the QUARTER jr or the Windows desktop Shortcut you created for Qjr.exe.  This action starts loading QUARTER jr from the hard disk to the random access memory (RAM) and starts the program running.


The splash screen identifying the version of the QUARTER jr program you have will now appear.  This will be followed by the QUARTER jr Input Data screen including a menu of commands.  By choosing one of the menu items from the menus (File, Timeslip, Graph, Window and Help), you command QUARTER jr to do whatever you choose.


QUARTER jr can also be started by double-clicking on any data document that you have created and saved.



                                        2-1



By double-clicking on a data document you can pick right up where you left off!  However, to use this optional method you must first "register" the QUARTER jr application file with the "*.dat" data file type using the Windows "File Types" manager.


The Windows "File Types" manager is selected by double-clicking on "My Computer" and selecting "Options" from the "View" command menu.  The tab for setting the application "File Types" can now be selected.


Sample QUARTER jr Analysis

To begin with, select and then open the ProStock.dat QUARTER jr data document.  Now, let's take a quick look at the QUARTER jr Input Data screen.  The Input Data screen contains all the data necessary to perform the performance calculations. 


General information about the weather conditions, and the weight, and wheelbase of the vehicle are included.  There are engine power inputs and clutch data, transmission gear ratios, final drive ratio, and tire size!


Any of these input data values may easily be changed using the editing features of QUARTER jr which are fully described in Chapters 3 and 4 of this manual.



2-2



Now slowly press the tab key a few times and watch how the cursor moves around the QUARTER jr Input Data screen.  When you get to the Transmission Gear Ratios you must use the arrow keys to navigate instead.


You can also use the mouse to select any input variable to modify.  Single-clicking on the variable value allows you to insert and delete.  Double-clicking allows direct replacement of the input variable value.


Now press the Timeslip button (the command button with the dark green TS) to begin the detailed calculations for the vehicle performance based on the current data.


After a second, the calculations are complete, and the Timeslip is displayed.  A detailed description of all the Calculated Output from QUARTER jr is included in Chapter 5 of this manual.


Press the Detailed Parameters button located at the bottom of the Timeslip.  This screen shows all the vehicle Detailed Parameters, including time, distance, acceleration and engine RPM.


Press one of the Vehicle Performance Graph buttons located to the right of the Print button.  These graphs show the Detailed Parameters just like you get them from an expensive on-board data recorder!



                                        2-3



That's all there is to it!  You can now return to the QUARTER jr Input Data screen by closing the Timeslip, Detailed Parameters and Vehicle Performance Graph screens - simply click the mouse on the close box in the upper right hand corner.



Or you can use the mouse to click anywhere on the QUARTER jr Input Data screen and the other open screens will be closed automatically.  You can also go the Window: drop-down command menu and select the Input Data screen.



Now, try changing the weight to 2,000 pounds, and then press the Timeslip button to obtain the Timeslip for this lighter weight.



How much quicker does the ProStock racecar go?  Is the engine RPM too high through the lights?  (Press the Detailed Parameters and RPM-MPH vs Time graph buttons to find out!)  Maybe the final drive gear ratio needs changing?  Perhaps taller tires will do the trick?



These are the types of questions QUARTER jr was designed to answer, quickly and economically, without ever having to go to the dragstrip to test!



2-4





QUARTER jr also includes powerful calculation worksheets available by pressing any one of the three Worksheet buttons at any time.  The Worksheet buttons are located next to their corresponding input variables and have a ... symbol on them.  Try pressing the Frontal Area Worksheet button located at the Frontal Area input variable location now.



The Frontal Area Worksheet will be displayed for easily calculating the vehicle frontal area.  The Frontal Area Worksheet variables are described starting on page 4-12 of this manual.



The frontal area is automatically calculated as you enter the worksheet data.  Press the close box in the upper right-hand corner to return to the QUARTER jr Input Data screen when you are finished using the worksheet.



Note that the calculated frontal area from the worksheet does not automatically transfer to the QUARTER jr Input Data screen.  You must still input any new value for yourself.






                                        2-5




QUARTER jr also includes help screens available by pressing one of the Help button at any time.  The Help buttons are located next to their corresponding input variables and have a ? symbol on them.  Try pressing the Traction Index Help button located at the Traction Index input variable location now.



The Traction Index help screen is included with QUARTER jr to conveniently illustrate the choices available for the input Traction Index.



Press the close box in the upper right-hand corner of the help screen to return to the QUARTER jr Input Data screen.



Selecting the Exit command from the File menu (or typing Control+X) will return your computer to the Windows desktop.



Good luck and have fun!  The remaining chapters of this manual provide you with the detailed knowledge and skills necessary to fully exploit the power and versatility of QUARTER jr and your Windows PC.






2-6




CHAPTER 3:  THE COMMAND MENUS



Five Windows command menus; File, Timeslip, Graph, Window and Help, containing a variety of menu items are used with QUARTER jr to specify the command option desired.  These menu options may generally be selected anytime while running the program.



Three of the File menu options - Open, Save and Print are also available by using command buttons.  These are conveniently located just below the command menu near the top left hand side of the QUARTER jr Input Data screen.



The Timeslip and Graph menu options are also available by using several more command buttons located to the right of the Print command button.



This chapter of the QUARTER jr manual contains a complete, detailed description for each of the command menu and button options.








                                        3-1

  


File: Open

The Open command is used to retrieve from the disk and display on the QUARTER jr Input Data screen a previously saved QUARTER jr data document.  Selecting Open from the File menu (or pressing the Open command button) will cause a standard Windows dialog box to appear, awaiting the selection of a QUARTER jr data document.


Once the input data document is selected, the data values are retrieved and displayed on the QUARTER jr Input Data screen.  The cursor is always left at the "Note:" position following this option.


The Open command can be used to open an existing data document so that it may be modified as desired.  The retrieved input data can also serve as a base for building another data document to be saved using the Save As option described below.




File: Save

The Save command is used to save the current vehicle data on your disk.  Selecting Save from the File menu will save the data using the current document name.  You may also press the Save command button to select this feature.




3-2





File: Save As

The Save As command is used to save the current input data on your disk with a new document name.  You must always select Save As from the File menu for this command.




File: Print

The Print command is used to make a complete, printed copy of both the input vehicle data and the Detailed Parameters from QUARTER jr.  The printout may also contain the data in the QUARTER jr calculation Worksheets as well as the QUARTER jr Vehicle Performance Graphs depending on your selections from the File: Preferences screen, described on the next page.


Selecting the Print command in the File menu (or the Print command button) at any time will cause the printer to start printing.












                                        3-3




File: Preferences

The File: Preferences screen is used to select and save QUARTER jr options regarding:

1.  where the data documents are stored,

2.  and how the Calculated Output and Vehicle Performance Graphs are to be displayed on your printer.



File: Exit

The Exit command in the File menu can be used at any time to exit the QUARTER jr program and return to the Windows desktop.  You may also exit QUARTER jr by pressing the close box in the upper right hand corner of the Input Data screen.



Timeslip:

The Timeslip command can be used at any time to start the calculations to determine the vehicle dragstrip performance.  The results of these calculations will be shown on the QUARTER jr Timeslip screen.

You may also press the Timeslip command button to select the Timeslip screen.  The Timeslip command button has a dark green TS and is located just to the right of the Print command button at the top of the QUARTER jr Input Data screen.


3-4



Graphs:

The Graph menu contains commands that allow the selection and display of any or all of four graphs that are available from QUARTER jr:

 - RPM & MPH vs Time
 - Acceleration and Distance vs Time
 - RPM and MPH vs Distance
 - Acceleration and Time vs Distance

The Graph menu items and corresponding Graph command buttons may only be selected after the calculated performance has been completed.  The Graph command options are only enabled after selecting the Timeslip command.



Window:

The Window menu provides commands for selecting how the Vehicle Performance Graphs are presented on the computer screen as described below.  The Window menu also provides another way of selecting among the open QUARTER jr program screens - just like many other Windows applications.

In other words, if after viewing the Timeslip screen and some of the Vehicle Performance Graphs you want to go back to change the Input Data, select the Window menu with the mouse and then choose the Input Data screen from the drop down list.  This action will automatically close all the Calculated Output screens.



                                        3-5





Window: Cascade Graphs

Normally, the QUARTER jr Vehicle Performance Graphs are displayed in a "cascade" fashion as you consecutively select them from the Graph command menu or by using the Graph command buttons.  That is, they overlay one another in a staggered line-up.



Window: Tile Graphs

The Tile Graphs command in the Window menu resizes the four Vehicle Performance Graphs and places them side by side on your computer screen.  This option allows you to view all the graphs simultaneously and is the same format used when printing the Vehicle Performance Graphs to your printer in the 4 per page format.


















3-6




CHAPTER 4:  INPUT VARIABLES



How to Input


The Input Data screen is where the editing required to build a vehicle data document takes place.  This chapter of the QUARTER jr manual contains a complete, detailed description of all the input variables.


Before getting into the definitions of the input variables, let's discuss how you provide input to QUARTER jr via your computer keyboard and mouse.


The mouse is used to select the input variable to be changed.  Most of the input variables are edited by selecting them with the mouse and simply typing in a new value.


If you make a mistake when typing, use the Back Space key to backup and erase, and then reenter your data.


Pressing the Tab key (or the Return or Enter keys) signifies the end of the variable entry.  The Tab key will also advance the cursor to the next input data variable.  Pressing the Return or Enter keys will hold the cursor in the current input variable location.



                                        41




A maximum of five digits may be input for the numeric variables.  If more than five digits are entered, the excess will be ignored.  Only numeric inputs are allowed.


Also, if you enter a value outside the range of acceptable variable inputs, you will receive a warning message on the screen and QUARTER jr will automatically change the value to be within the established QUARTER jr limits.


Some of the data values are determined by selecting from a drop-down menu.  An example of this type of input is the Fuel System:  Simply use the mouse to click the Fuel System: list box and a menu will appear showing the possible selections.  Click the mouse button on the Fuel System: that you are modeling.


Some of the data values are determined by selecting option or check boxes.  An example of this type of input is the Torque Converter or Clutch option located in the Transmission data.  Simply use the mouse to select either the torque converter or clutch option button.


The remainder of this chapter of the QUARTER jr manual contains a complete, detailed description for each of the input vehicle variables.  A complete description of the three QUARTER jr Worksheets is also included beginning on page 4-12.


4-2



General


Note: = A descriptive string of up to 255 characters used to more completely identify the input vehicle data document.


Elevation = The actual dragstrip elevation above sea level expressed in feet.  Normal input values for the dragstrip Elevation are between 0 and 6,000.


Barometer = The local relative barometric pressure at the dragstrip expressed in inches of Mercury (in Hg).  The "standard atmosphere" Barometer is normally set at 29.92 in Hg.  Normal input values for the Barometer are between 29.0 and 31.0.


* Notes on Elevation and Barometer Inputs *

The Elevation and Barometer inputs are used to determine the local drag strip absolute ambient pressure (psia or in Hg) in QUARTER jr.  "Standard Atmosphere" conditions are used for this calculation.

You can use "altimeter" for the Elevation, but you must always input 29.92 for the Barometer when doing so.

Never use "relative or density altitude" for the Elevation in QUARTER jr!

Always input the actual, measured Temperature and Relative Humidity to QUARTER jr!


                                        4-3



Temperature = The dragstrip outside air temperature expressed in degrees Fahrenheit (deg F).  This value is also known as the "dry bulb" temperature.  Normal input values for the ambient Temperature are between 40 and 110.


Relative Humidity = The local relative humidity at the dragstrip expressed in percent (%).  Normal input values for the Relative Humidity are between 15 and 90.



Vehicle

Weight = The total vehicle weight including driver expressed in pounds (lbs).  Normal input values for the vehicle Weight are between 1,200 and 4,000.


Rollout = The distance the vehicle must move before the timing clock starts, expressed in inches.  This distance is a function of the front tire diameter, the height of the stage photocell above the dragstrip surface, and how deep the vehicle is staged.  A good rule of thumb is to use one-half of the staging tire's diameter.  Normal input values for the Rollout distance are between 6 and 14.

If Rollout is input as 0.0, the timing sequence will start immediately with the vehicle movement.  This is the way some automotive testing is performed, especially for magazine articles and for factory specification tables.


4-4




Wheelbase = The measured vehicle wheelbase, expressed in inches.  Normal input values for the Wheelbase are between 90 and 300.




The vehicle aerodynamic drag is calculated from the input body style and frontal area.


Body Style: = a drop-down menu to select which vehicle body style is to be modeled by QUARTER jr:

	- dragster with wing
	- dragster
	- funny car body
	- altered/roadster
	- fastback
	- sedan
	- station wagon, truck or van
	- motorcycle


Frontal Area = The frontal (or reference)  area used to calculate the aerodynamic drag force.  The Frontal Area is expressed in square feet and is normally the projected frontal area of the vehicle.  Normal input values for the Frontal Area are between 12 and 28.

note: The Frontal Area can easily be calculated using the Frontal Area Worksheet described on page 4-12.





                                        45




Engine


The engine  power data is input for the "standard" ambient conditions of sea level elevation, 29.92 in Hg, 60 deg F and no humidity (i.e. dry air).  This is the same "standard" that most aftermarket, racing and high performance engines are rated at.


The engine power data is "referred" to the local dragstrip conditions specified by the General data, based on the SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) J1349 Standard method for the QUARTER jr performance analysis.



Fuel System: = a drop-down menu to select which type of fuel and fuel system are to modeled by QUARTER jr.

	- Gasoline Carburetor
	- Gasoline Injector
	- Methanol Carburetor
	- Methanol Injector
	- Nitromethane Injector
	- Supercharged Gasoline
	- Supercharged Methanol
	- Supercharged Nitro


Displacement = The engine displacement expressed in cubic inches.  Normal input values for the engine Displacement are between 77 and 632.




4-6




RPM@ Peak HP = The engine speed at peak power expressed in revolutions per minute (RPM).  Normal input values for the engine dyno data RPM@ Peak HP are between 2,000 and 12,000.



Peak HP = The engine's peak power expressed in horsepower.  The Peak HP is rated at the flywheel in QUARTER jr, the same way it would be measured on an engine dyno.  Chassis dynos measure driving wheel road horsepower and are typically between 10% to 15% lower than the engine flywheel Peak HP.  Normal input values for the engine Peak HP are between 100 and 6,000.



NO2 option? = An option check box to command QUARTER jr to use Nitrous Oxide with the Fuel System selection.



Shift@ RPM = The engine speed when gear changes or shifting are to occur, expressed in revolutions per minute (RPM).  Normal input values for the engine Shift@ RPM are between 4,500 and 12,500.










                                        4-7



Transmission

Either a torque converter or clutch type transmission may be modeled with QUARTER jr.  The Transmission Data inputs described below are used for either of these vehicle powertrain configurations.  The Torque Converter and Clutch option buttons determine which inputs are used.


Clutch & Manual Transmission

Slip RPM = The minimum engine RPM observed as the vehicle leaves the dragstrip starting line in low gear.  This is the engine RPM below which the clutch will normally slip.  This is not the engine RPM the car is staged at, but rather the engine RPM when the car starts to move.  Normal input values for the clutch Slip RPM are between 2,000 and 7,000.


Lock-up option? = An option check box to command QUARTER jr to lock-up the clutch during the shifts.


Torque Converter & Automatic Transmission

The torque converter Stall RPM may be input in one of the two ways described below:

Stall RPM = The stall or "flash" speed of the torque converter.  The Stall RPM is the engine speed at which torque multiplication can occur in the torque converter.  Normal input values for the torque converter Stall RPM are between 2,000 and 7,500.


4-8



Stall Index = An advanced feature of QUARTER jr used to specify the stall capacity of a given torque converter design.  Normal input values for the Stall Index are between 30 and 160.

Every torque converter has a unique Stall Index based primarily on it's geometric design: that is, diameter, stator and impeller, fin angles, clearances, etc.  Transmission fluid density, pressure and temperature can also affect the Stall Index, but these effects are usually small.

You must use QUARTER jr to "back into" the Stall Index for your torque converter.  These values are not currently available from the torque converter manufacturers.  Once the torque converter Stall Index is specified, QUARTER jr will calculate the Stall RPM as a function of the engine HP data and the ambient weather conditions.  The exact same torque converter will have different Stall RPM with different engines, and also as the weather changes!


Lock-up option? = An option check box to command QUARTER jr to completely lock-up the torque converter after the first shift.


Converter Diameter = The converter diameter expressed in inches.  Normal values for the Converter Diameter are between 7 and 12.


Gear Ratio = The cumulative transmission gear ratios for each gear of the transmission.  Usual input values for the transmission Gear Ratio are around 3.0 for low gear and 1.0 for high gear.
                                        4-9




Final Drive


Gear Ratio = The gear ratio of the final drive.  Normal input values for the final drive Gear Ratio are between 3.07 and 6.50.

note: Use the Motorcycle Final Drive Worksheet described on page 4-14 to determine the overall final drive gear ratio for motorcycles.



The Tire Diameter may be input into QUARTER jr in one of the two ways described below:


Tire Diameter = The driving tire diameter expressed in inches.  This dimension is obtained by measuring the diameter of a properly inflated tire without the weight of the vehicle being supported by the tire. Normal input values for the Tire Diameter are between 24 and 37.


Tire Rollout = The driving tire circumference expressed in inches.  This dimension is obtained by measuring the circumference of a properly inflated tire without the weight of the vehicle being supported by the tire.  Normal input values for the Tire Rollout are between 75 and 118.






4-10




Tire Width = The driving tire's "effective" width expressed in inches.  This dimension is obtained by measuring the width of a properly inflated tire.


For treaded street tires, the "effective" Tire Width is determined by subtracting the total width of the tread grooves from the measured tire width.  Normal input values for the Tire Width are between 6 and 18.


note: Use the Tire Width Worksheet described on page 4-13 to estimate the effective Tire Width for treaded tires.  




Traction Index = Specifies the dragstrip traction conditions.  The best traction is obtained for an input Traction Index of 1 and represents the best traction ever demonstrated at the best racetrack. 


The Traction Index is a very strong function of how much race track surface preparation has been done.  National Events are always better than Divisional Events.  Average racetrack traction for local bracket events has a value of 5 or 6.  Street-like traction varies from about 8 to 12.  Press the Traction Index Help button to see some examples for Traction Index.





                                       4-11



Frontal Area Worksheet

The Frontal Area Worksheet is selected by pressing the Frontal Area Worksheet button located at the Frontal Area input variable position.  Control is returned to the QUARTER jr Input Data screen by pressing the close box when you are finished using the worksheet.

The Frontal Area Worksheet is included with QUARTER jr to help you quickly estimate the projected frontal area for your vehicle.  Each of the Frontal Area Worksheet variables are fully described in the following paragraphs.


Maximum Width = The measured width of the vehicle at it's widest point, expressed in inches.  Normal values for the Maximum Width are between 48 and 72.


Maximum Height = The measured distance from the ground to the highest point on the vehicle, expressed in inches.  Normal values for the Maximum Height are between 40 and 60.


Shape Factor = A factor to help determine the actual vehicle frontal area expressed in percent (%).  The projected frontal area is never a pure rectangle defined simply by the Maximum Width and Maximum Height.  There are always corners, gaps and sloping side surfaces.  The Shape Factor specifies how much of the pure rectangular area is really blocking the air.


4-12



Press the Shape Factor Help button to see some examples for the Shape Factor.  Normal values for the Shape Factor are between 65 and 90.


Tire Width Worksheet

The Tire Width Worksheet is selected by pressing the Tire Width Worksheet button located at the Tire Width input variable position.  Control is returned to the QUARTER jr Input Data screen by pressing the close box when you are finished using the worksheet.

The Tire Width Worksheet is included with QUARTER jr to help you quickly estimate the "effective" Tire Width for treaded street tires.  Each of the Tire Width Worksheet variables are fully described in the following paragraphs.


Tread Width = The measured overall tread width, expressed in inches.  Normal values for the Tread Width are between 6 and 12.


Number of Grooves = The number of grooves in the treaded street tire.  The Number of Grooves varies considerably but is usually less than 10.


Each Groove Width = The measured width of each individual tread groove, expressed in inches.  Normal values for Each Groove Width are between .125 and .25.



                                       4-13




Motorcycle Final Drive Worksheet


The Motorcycle Final Drive Worksheet is selected by pressing the Motorcycle Final Drive Worksheet button located at the Gear Ratio input variable position.  Control is returned to the QUARTER jr Input Data screen by pressing the close box when you are finished using the worksheet.


The Motorcycle Final Drive Worksheet is included with QUARTER jr to help you quickly calculate the overall final drive Gear Ratio for your motorcycle.  Each of the Motorcycle Final Drive Worksheet variables are fully described in the following paragraphs.



Primary Drive Gear Reduction = The gear reduction between the motorcycle engine crankshaft and transmission mainshaft.  Normal values for the Primary Drive Gear Reduction are around 1.8.


Countershaft Sprocket Teeth = The number of teeth on the countershaft sprocket.  Normal values for the Countershaft Sprocket Teeth are between 12 and 18.


Rear Wheel Sprocket Teeth = The number of teeth on the rear wheel sprocket.  Normal values for the Rear Wheel Sprocket Teeth are between 40 and 50.


414




CHAPTER 5:  CALCULATED OUTPUT


The calculated output from QUARTER jr is divided into three parts - the Timeslip, Detailed Parameters, and the Vehicle Performance Graphs.  Please refer to the output of the sample case on you computer monitor to get a complete understanding of all the QUARTER jr calculated output.



Timeslip

The QUARTER jr Timeslip contains all the calculated quarter-mile performance data in the same format as that reported at the race track.  It includes the 60 ft, 330 ft, eighth-mile, 1000 ft and quarter-mile elapsed times (ET) as well as the eighth-mile and quarter-mile speeds (MPH).

The two MPH outputs are determined from the time required to cover the distances between 594 and 660 feet for the eighth-mile; and 1254 and 1320 feet for the quarter-mile.  These are the exact same MPH calculations that the racetrack uses.



Detailed Parameters

The QUARTER jr Detailed Parameters contain all the calculated vehicle performance data in a tabular format.  These data include the Time, Distance, MPH, Acceleration, Gear, and RPM for many dragstrip positions.


                                        5-1



Each line of the Detailed Parameters corresponds to a specific event or trigger that caused QUARTER jr to print to the screen.  These events are explained in this chapter of the QUARTER jr manual.

The first two lines of Detailed Parameters are for the time the vehicle is in the staging beams, i.e. the Rollout distance.  The first line is for the initial conditions; time, distance, and speed are zero.  The vehicle is in 1st gear with the engine speed equal to the Slip RPM or Stall RPM.  The rate of acceleration in g's is displayed for this condition.

**Note:  1g = 32.174 ft/sec/sec

The second line corresponds to the instant that the timing clocks starts; that is, the front tire is just out of the stage beam.  The distance is labeled as "Rollout" and two times are displayed; the time required to move the Rollout distance, and the reset time of 0.0 as the timing clock starts.

Note the small (s) to the right of the Acceleration value for the first line of the sample ProStock Detailed Parameters.  This indicates that the tires are simply not capable of transmitting all the tire torque the engine and overall gear ratio are providing at this point.  Having three or more lines with an (s) is unacceptable for actual ontrack operation.

However, this tire slipping condition (s) can frequently occur during the Rollout distance.  If you have two lines with an (s) . . beware, as you may be on the edge of tire shake or blowing the tires away.

5-2



The third line of the sample ProStock Detailed Parameters is the result of a distance trigger at 30 feet.  Other distance triggers occur at 60, 330, 660 (eighth-mile), 1000, and 1320 feet.

The fourth line is the result of a speed match trigger.  QUARTER jr provides output for the popular 060 MPH and 0100 MPH timing intervals.

The sixth and seventh lines of the sample ProStock Detailed Parameters are the result of a gear change event.  The engine speed is at the Shift@ RPM in 1st gear on the fifth line, and at a reduced engine speed in 2nd gear on the sixth line.  The remaining gear changes will also trigger two lines of vehicle performance data on the QUARTER jr Detailed Parameters screen.

QUARTER jr will also sometimes select a time interval for Detailed Parameters of either 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, or 10.0 seconds.  Detailed vehicle performance data are also provided at regular multiples of the selected time interval.

The last line of Detailed Parameters includes the conditions right at the quarter-mile or 1320 ft timing mark.

In summary, several events or triggers are used to generate QUARTER jr Detailed Parameters. These include Rollout, distance, gear changes, speed matches, and elapsed time intervals.  Thousands of intermediate calculations are performed between each of the lines displayed on the QUARTER jr Detailed Parameters screen.


                                        5-3




Vehicle Performance Graphs


The Vehicle Performance Graphs display the QUARTER jr calculated Detailed Parameters in a graphical, sometimes more easy to understand format.  Any  combination of the following four graphs may be displayed after the calculated performance is completed:


 - RPM & MPH vs Time
 - Acceleration and Distance vs Time
 - RPM and MPH vs Distance
 - Acceleration and Time vs Distance


The Vehicle Performance Graphs always show two sets of data plotted against either time (in seconds) or distance (in feet).


For example, the RPM & MPH vs Time graph includes an RPM axis on the left side of the graph, and a MPH axis on the right.  The x-axis, located along the bottom is for time.  This graphical format is just like you get from an on-board data recorder.


The graph legend highlights which color is used for each data set - blue for the left axis (RPM in this case) and red for the right axis (MPH in this case).  This same graphical format is used for all four of the QUARTER jr Vehicle Performance Graphs.




5-4
